---
title: 'Creating Builder Structures in Rustlang'
excerpt: 'Rust is one of the most complicated languages to build data
structures. Everyone who uses the language knows this, but it is part of
the reason we love the language. The only way to demistify, is to build
real world examples!'
coverImage: '/assets/blog/img_bin/cyberpunk_girl_reading_tablet.jpg'
date: '2023-06-06T13:59:38.879Z'
author:
  name: Justin Bender
  picture: '/assets/blog/authors/bender.png'
ogImage:
  url: '/assets/blog/img_bin/cyberpunk_girl_reading_tablet.jpg'
---

## Building with builder patterns

Rust is one of the most complicated languages to build data
structures. Everyone who uses the language knows this, but it is part of
the reason we love the language. The only way to de-mistify, is to build
real world examples!

In the past, I have built software using **JavaScript/TypeScript**. The
higher level languages have some benefits. For example, most of the
basic data structures (arrays) are abstracted away. While everything
becomes an object with method calls.

When we think of JavaScript. It's all object based. The array is just an
object, functions are objects, and even objects are objects 🧙.
When we dive into Rust. It changes a tad. This is due to the fact. We
have more freedom to be dangerous.

> Dangerous, but with training wheels.

What does, "Dangerous, but with training wheels" mean? Well the compiler
has a set of rules that we must follow to run our code. If we were to
compare it to `C`. You will have a no rules environment. If you want to
create segfaults or stack overflows. It's fair game. With Rust on the
other hand. It comes with the batteries included to protect from simple
mistakes.

Don't get me wrong. Just because it watches you. Doesn't mean it's
always easy to develop.

It's one of those languages that you use when correctness is a feature.
If you want quick prototyping. You might find yourself in Python or
JavaScript land. Where we abstract away all the lower level design
patterns.

### Let's start understanding a project structure

We will start on the `Cargo.toml` and work our way through our
supporting files. Until we get to work on the builder patterns.

**Cargo.toml**:

```rust
[package]
name = "builder_patterns"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2021"

# See more keys and their definitions at https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/manifest.html

[dependencies]
thiserror = "1"
```

* The only crate we have is [thiserror - Rust -
  Docs.rs](https://docs.rs/thiserror/latest/thiserror/). Which is a nice
  feature to create error handing in one enum. There are more steps
  involved. So you should read through the docs.

Let's go right into the **errors.rs**:

```rust
#[derive(thiserror::Error, Debug)]
pub enum Error {
    #[error("Generic error: {0}")]
    Generic(String),
    #[error("Static error: {0}")]
    Static(&'static str),
    #[error(transparent)]
    IO(#[from] std::io::Error),
}
```

The Rust enum represents different types of errors that could occur in
your program. It is using the `thiserror` crate to derive
implementations of the standard library's `std::error::Error` trait for
your error type. The `#[error]` annotation devine how to display each
variant of the enum.

* `Generic(String)`: Generic error that can hold a String message.
* `Static(&'static str)`: Error that holds a static string that is
  hardcoded into your program.
* `IO(std::io::Error)`:Variant from the standard library's I/O module.
  The `#[from]` annotation mean that this error variant can be
  automatically created from `std::io::Error` values, which is a common
  error type.
* `#[error(transparent)]`: Annotation for the `IO` variant means that
  this variant does not change the `source` or `backtrace` of the inner
  error. This is useful when one error type is a thin wrapper around
  another.

This allows us to have a single error type that represents all the
different errors that could occur.

### Okay configs and Errors are we ready for some code yet?

Almost, but we have one more setup file we should talk about called the
`prelude.rs`

```rust
//! Crate prelude

pub use crate::error::Error;

pub type Result<T> = core::result::Result<T, Error>;

// Generic Wrapper tuple struct for newtype pattern,
pub struct W<T>(pub T);

// Possible Option
pub use std::format as f;
```

What do we have going on in the `prelude`?

* We bring in the `crate::error::Error` in and make it public.
* We make a type `Result<T>` this is a pattern that allows us to focus.
  on the `Result<t>` instead of the error pattern in `error.rs`.

* We create a public tuple struct `W` with a single public field of any
  type. The `W` struct can be used to wrap any type T.
* Re-exporting `std::format` as `f` to use shorthand.

Now we have most of the basic setup for the project finished. Soon we
will get to work on our builder patterns. But first let's start at the
very top of main for the structure of the project.

```rust
mod error;
mod prelude;
use prelude::*;
```

* We create the error page by using `mod error` and the prelude page
  with `prelude`. By create. I mean they are modules in the scope of the
  project. This doesn't mean we are using them. This is a direction to
  the compiler.
* We use the prelude file/module that we have created.

Now we are at a point we can start working in main. We just don't have
any structure at all. So we could create some.

### Building on the basic program structure

* Create a new file call `task.rs`
* Add a `mod task` to the `main.rs`
* Use the public features of the task file with `use task::Task;`

Now that we know how the updated main header will look:

```rust
mod error;
mod prelude;
mod task;
use prelude::*;
use task::Task;
```

Let's make our way over to the `task.rs` file. Start with building the
structure we will implement.

### This is a very simple struct. We have:

```rust
#[derive(Debug)]
pub struct Task {
    pub title: String,
    pub done: bool,
    pub desc: Option<String>,
}
```

* `title`: Which is a String
* `done`: Which is a boolean value (true or false)
* `desc`: Is an option of type String. An option is the ability to have
  `Some(value)` or `None`. This let's us know that the value can be
  empty.

There are a few things that we should be thinking about when we create
these structures in our code. Some things like `defaults` and what
values can be used with in our functions. For this section we will work
with values that implement `Into<String>`. This will help when we want
to use the value of the String. This helps us create new `Self` values
returned from creating new values.

Let's create a default. This will allow us to use features like
`or_default`. We do this by implementing `Default for Task`.

```rust
impl Default for Task {
    fn default() -> Self {
        Self {
            title: String::from("Untitled"),
            done: false,
            desc: None,
        }
    }
}
```

Now we have a struct and a default implemented. Now let's work on the
first method to implement. The `new` function.

```rust
impl Task {
    pub fn new<T>(title: T) -> Task
    where
        T: Into<String>,
    {
        Task {
            title: title.into(),
            done: false,
            desc: None,
        }
    }
}
```

### Let's get some testing structure ready

We want to make sure that the features we build are working to the
standards the we personally set. The best way to to that is to build the
tests. Set the standards and work to have them completed.

```rust
#[cfg(test)]
mod task_test {
    #[allow(unused)]
    use super::*;

    #[test]
    fn create_new() {
        assert_eq!(true, false);
    }
}
```

Right away when we run this is will fail. Obviously `true` is not equal
to `false`. We now want to use our own Task structure to create a new
struct. Then we need to test it somehow. What type of things would you
test?

These first test will work because we made the struct values public. If
we didn't use the `pub` before the values. It would be inaccessible from
outside of the module.

```rust
#[cfg(test)]
mod task_test {
    use super::*;

    #[test]
    fn default_same_module() {
        let task = Task::default();
        assert_eq!(task.title, "Untitled");
        assert_eq!(task.done, false);
        assert_eq!(task.desc, None);

        let task: Option<Task> = None;
        let task = task.unwrap_or_default();
        assert_eq!(task.title, "Untitled");
        assert_eq!(task.done, false);
        assert_eq!(task.desc, None);

        let task = Task {
            done: true,
            desc: Some(String::from("Walk the dog.")),
            ..Default::default()
        };
        assert_eq!(task.title, "Untitled");
        assert_eq!(task.done, true);
        assert_eq!(task.desc, Some(String::from("Walk the dog.")));
    }
    #[test]
    fn new_same_module() {
        let mut task = Task::new("Test One");
        assert_eq!(task.title, "Test One");
        assert_eq!(task.done, false);
        assert_eq!(task.desc, None);

        task.done = true;
        task.desc = Some(String::from("Kicking the soccer ball."));
        assert_eq!(task.done, true);
        assert_eq!(task.desc, Some(String::from("Kicking the soccer ball.")));

        let task = Task {
            desc: Some(String::from("Go for dinner")),
            ..Task::new("Date Night")
        };
        assert_eq!(task.title, "Date Night");
        assert_eq!(task.done, false);
        assert_eq!(task.desc.unwrap(), String::from("Go for dinner"));
    }


}
```

### What do we do after we have build the new function on our structure?

We can build some access methods to access the values. This will allow
the values on the structures private outside of this file. We could also
make the values public, but I prefer the getter and setter methods.

```rust

```
