---
title: 'Jumping back into Rust 🦀 after a break'
excerpt: 'Rust is one of the most complicated languages for me to learn. It is
not extremely hard to really understand what is going on. It just requires a bit
more time and effort. For this post we will start on day one of Comprehensive
Rust by Google'
coverImage: '/assets/blog/img_bin/comprehensive_rust.png'
date: '2023-09-30T18:43:40.914Z'
author:
  name: 'Justin Bender'
  picture: '/assets/blog/authors/bender.png'
ogImage:
  url: '/assets/blog/img_bin/'
---

# Jumping back into Rust 🦀 after a break

### What are the goals of this course?

* Give you a comprehensive understanding of the Rust syntax and language.
* Enable you to modify existing programs and write new programs in Rust.
* Show you common Rust idioms.

#### Topics I would like to explore next:

* [Concurrency](https://google.github.io/comprehensive-rust/concurrency.html)

### Non-goals

Rust is a large language and we won't be able to cover all of it in a few days.
Some non-goals of this course are:

* Learning how to develop macros. You should go to the rust book or rust by
  example book.

---

* Day 1: Basic Rust, syntax, control flow, creating and consuming values.
* Day 2: Memory management, ownership, compound data types, and the standard
  library.
* Day 3: Generics, traits, error handling, testing, and unsafe Rust.

I think I'm going to skip most of this and go right into the concurrency
sections. It's a bit more interesting to me over just going over the items I've
already looked at for a while.

---

## Concurrency In Rust

Setup the project:

```rust
cargo init concurrency
cd concurrency
cargo add tokio --features full
cargo run
```

Rust has full support for concurrency using OS threads with mutexes and channels

The Rust type system plays an important role in making many concurrency bugs
compile time bugs. This is often referred to as fearless concurrency since you
can rely on the compiler to ensure correctness at runtime.

```rust
use std::thread;
use std::time::Duration;

fn main() {
    thread::spawn(|| {
        for i in 1..10 {
            println!("Count in thread: {i}!");
            thread::sleep(Duration::from_millis(5));
        }
    });

    for i in 1..5 {
        println!("Main thread: {i}");
        thread::sleep(Duration::from_millis(5));
    }
}
```

* Threads are all daemon threads, the main thread does not wait for them.
* Thread panics are independent of eachother.
  - Panics can carry a payload, which can be unpacked with `downcase_ref`.


* Notice that the thread is stopped before it reaches 10 — the main thread is not waiting.

* Use let handle = thread::spawn(...) and later handle.join() to wait for the thread to finish.

* Trigger a panic in the thread, notice how this doesn’t affect main.

*  Use the Result return value from handle.join() to get access to the panic payload. This is a good time to talk about Any.

```rust
use std::thread;
use std::time::Duration;

fn main() {
    let handle = thread::spawn(|| {
        for i in 1..10 {
            println!("Count in thread: {i}!");
            if i == 2 { panic!("Thread paniced at {}", i); }
            thread::sleep(Duration::from_millis(5));
        }
    });

    for i in 1..5 {
        println!("Main thread: {i}");
        thread::sleep(Duration::from_millis(5));
    }

    let result = handle.join();

    match result {
        Ok(_) => println!("Thread completed successfully."),
        Err(e) => {
            println!("Thread panicked: {:?}", e);
            if let Some(payload) = e.downcast_ref::<&str>() {
                println!("Panic payload {}", payload);
            } else if let Some(payload) = e.downcast_ref::<String>() {
                println!("Panic payload {}", payload);
            } else {
                println!("Unknown panic payload type.");
            }
        }
    }
}
```

This will make the extra thread fail at the 2nd loop. It still prints an
interesting error that I don't understand, but we will continue on in hopes that
it will become more clear in the future.

Normal threads cannot borrow from their environment.

```rust
use std::thread;

fn foo() {
    let s = String::from("Hello");
    thread::spawn(|| {
        println!("Length: {}", s.len());
    });
}

fn main() {
    foo();
}
```

However, you can used a scoped thread for this:

```rust
use std::thread;

fn foo() {
    let s = String::from("Hello");
    thread::scope(|scope| {
        scope.spawn(|| {
            println!("Length: {}", s.len());
        });
    });
}

fn main() {
    foo();
}
```

* The reason for that is that when the `thread::scope` function completes, all
  the threads are guaranteed to be joined, so they can return borrowed data.
* Normal Rust borrowing rules apply: you can either borrow mutably by one
  thread, or immutably by any number of threads.


#### Channels

Rust channels have two parts: a `Sender<T>` and a `Receiver<T>`. The two parts
are connected via the channel, but only see the end-points.

```rust
use std::sync::mpsc;

fn main() {
    let (tx, rx) = mpsc::channel();

    tx.send(10).unwrap();
    tx.send(20).unwrap();

    println!("Received: {:?}", rx.recv());
    println!("Received: {:?}", rx.recv());

    let tx2 = tx.clone();
    tx2.send(30).unwrap();
    println!("Received: {:?}", rx.recv());
}
```

* `mpsc` stands for Multi-Producer, Single-Consumer. `Sender` and `SyncSender`
  implement `Clone` (so you can make multiple producers) but `Receiver` does
  not.
* `send()` and `recv()` return `Result`. If they return `Err`, it means the
  counterpart `Sender` or `Receiver` is dropped and the channel is closed.

#### Unbounded Channels

You get an unbounded and asynchronous channel with `mpsc::channel()`:

```rust
use std::sync::mpsc;
use std::thread;
use std::time::Duration;

fn main() {
    let (tx, rx) = mpsc::channel();

    thread::spawn(move || {
        let thread_id = thread::current().id();
        for i in 1..10 {
            tx.send(format!("Message {i}")).unwrap();
            println!("{thread_id:?}: sent Message {i}");
        }
        println!("{thread_id:?}: done");
    });
    thread::sleep(Duration::from_millis(100));

    for msg in rx.iter() {
        println!("Main: got {msg}");
    }
}
```

#### Bounded Channels

With bounded channels (synchronous) channels, `send` can block the current
thread:

```rust
use std::sync::mpsc;
use std::thread;
use std::time::Duration;

fn main() {
    let (tx, rx) = mpsc::sync_channel(4);

    thread::spawn(move || {
        let thread_id = thread::current().id();
        for i in 1..10 {
            tx.send(format!("Message {i}")).unwrap();
            println!("{thread_id:?}: sent Message {i}");
        }
        println!("{thread_id:?}: done");
    });
    thread::sleep(Duration::from_millis(100));

    for msg in rx.iter() {
        println!("Main: got {msg}");
    }
}
```

The output is a bit strange to me.

```text
   Compiling concurrency v0.1.0 (/Users/justinbender/projects/rust_programs/concurrency)
    Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.14s
     Running `target/debug/concurrency`
ThreadId(2): sent Message 1
ThreadId(2): sent Message 2
ThreadId(2): sent Message 3
ThreadId(2): sent Message 4
Main: got Message 1
Main: got Message 2
Main: got Message 3
Main: got Message 4
Main: got Message 5
ThreadId(2): sent Message 5
ThreadId(2): sent Message 6
ThreadId(2): sent Message 7
ThreadId(2): sent Message 8
ThreadId(2): sent Message 9
ThreadId(2): done
Main: got Message 6
Main: got Message 7
Main: got Message 8
Main: got Message 9
[Finished running. Exit status: 0]
```

* Calling `send` will block the current thread until there is space in the
  channel for the new message. The thread can be blocked indefinitely if there
  is nobody who reads from the channel.
* A call to `send` will abort with an error ( that is why it returns `Result`)
  if the channel is closed. A channel is closed when the receiver is dropped.
* A bounded channel with a size of zero is called a "rendezvous channel`. Every
  send will block the current thread until another thread calls `read`.

#### Send and Sync

How does Rust know to forbid sharing access across threads? The answer is in two
traits:

* `Send`: a type `T` is `Send` if it is safe to move a `T` across a thread
  boundary.
* `Sync`: a type `T` is `Sync` if it is safe to move a `&T` across a thread
  boundary.

`Send` and `Sync` are unsafe traits. The compiler will automatically derive them
for your types as long as they only contain `Send` and `Sync` types. You can
also implement them manually when you know it is valid.

* One can think of these traits as markers that the type has certain
  thread-safety properties.
* They can be used in the generic constraints as normal traits.

#### Send

> A type `T` is `Send` if it is safe to move a `T` value to another thread.

The effect of moving ownership to another thread is that destructors wil run in
that thread. So the question is when you can allocate a value in one thread and
deallocate it in another.

An example, a connection to the SQLite library must only be accessed form a
single thread.

#### Sync

> A type `T` is `Sync` if it is safe to access `T` value from multiple threads
at the same time.

More precisely, the definition is:

> `T` is `Sync` if and only if `&T` is `Send`

This statement is essentially a shorthand way of saying that if a type is
thread-safe for shared use, it is also thread-safe to pass references of it
across threads.

This is because if a type is Sync it means that it can be shared across multiple
threads without the risk of data races or other synchronization issues, so it is
safe to move it to another thread. A reference of the type is also safe to move
to another thread, because the data it references can be accessed for any thread
safely.

### Examples

#### Send + Sync

Most types you come across are `Send + Sync`:

* `i8`, `f32`, `bool`, `char`, `&str`, ...
* `(T1, T2)`, `[T; N]`, `&[T]`, `struct { x: T }`, ...
* `String, Option<T>`, `Vec<T>`, `Box<T>`, ...
* `Arc<T>`: Explicitly thread-safe via atomic reference count.
* `Mutex<T>`: Explicitly thread-safe via internal locking
* `AtomicBool`, `AtomicU8`, ...: Uses special atomic instructions.

The generic types are typically `Send + Sync` when the type parameters are
`Send + Sync`.

#### Send + !Sync

These types can be moved to other threads, but they're not thread-safe.
Typically because of interior mutability.

* `mpsc::Sender<T>`
* `mpsc::Receiver<T>`
* `Cell<T>`
* `RefCell<T>`

#### !Send + Sync

These types are thread safe, but they cannot be moved to another thread:

* `MutexGuard<T>`: Uses OS level primitives which must be deallocated on the
  thread which created them.

#### !Send + !Sync

These types are not thread-safe and cannot be moved to other threads:

* `Rc<T>`: each `Rc<T>` has a reference to and `RcBox<T>`, which contains a
  non-atomic reference count.
* `*const T`, `*mut T`: Rust assumes raw pointers may have special concurrency
  considerations.

### Shared state

Rust uses the type system to enforce synchronization of shared data. This is
primarily done via two types.

* `Arc<T>`, atomic reference counted `T`: handles shared between threads and
  takes care to deallocate `T` when the last reference is dropped.
* `Mutex<T>`: ensures mutability exclusive access to the `T` value.

#### Arc

`Arc<T>` allows shared read-only access via `Arc::clone`:

```rust
use std::thread;
use std::sync::Arc;

fn main() {
    let v = Arc::new(vec![10, 20, 30]);
    let mut handles = Vec::new();
    for _ in 1..5 {
        let v = Arc::clone(&v);
        handles.push(thread::spawn(move || {
            let thread_id = thread::current().id();
            println!("{thread_id:?}: {v:?}");
        }));
    }
    handles.into_iter().for_each(|h| h.join().unwrap());
    println!("v: {v:?}");
}
```

* `Arc` stands for "Atomic Reference Counted", a thread safe version or `Rc that
  used atomic operations.
* `Arc<T>` implements `Clone` whether or not `T` does. It implements `Send` and
  `Sync` if and only if `T` implements them both.
* `Arc::clone()` has the cost of atomic operations that get executed, but after
  that the use of the `T` is free.
* Beware of reference cycles, `Arc` does not use a garbage collector to detect
  them.
  - `std::sync::Weak` can help.

#### Mutex

`Mutex<T>` ensures mutual exclusion and allows mutable access to `T` behind a
read-only interface:

```rust
use std::sync::Mutex;

fn main() {
    let v = Mutex::new(vec![10, 20, 30]);
    println!("v: {:?}", v.lock().unwrap());

    {
        let mut guard = v.lock().unwrap();
        guard.push(40);
    }
    {
        let mut guard2 = v.lock().unwrap();
        guard2.push(50);
    }

    println!("v: {:?}", v.lock().unwrap());
}
```

Notice how we have a `impl<T: Send> Sync for Mutex<T>` blanket implementation.

* `Mutex` in Rust looks like a collection with just one element - the protected
  data.
  - It is not possible to forget to acquire the mutex before accessing the
    protected data.
* You can get an `&mut T` from an `&Mutex<T>` by taking the lock. The
  `MutexGuard` ensures that the `&mut T` doesn't outlive the lock being held.
* `Mutex<T>` implements both `Send` and `Sync` iff (if and only if) `T`
  implements `Send`.
* A read-write lock counterpart - `RwLock`.
* Why does `lock()` return a `Result`?
  - If the thread that held the `Mutex` panicked, the `Mutex` becomes "poisoned"
    to signal that the data is protected might be an inconsistent state. Calling
    `lock()` on a poisoned mutex fails with a `PoisonError`. You can call
    `into_inner()` on the error to recover the data regardless.

### Example

Let us see `Arc` and `Mutex` in action:

```rust
use std::thread;
// use std::sync::{Arc, Mutex};

fn main() {
    let v = vec![10, 20, 30];
    let handle = thread::spawn(|| {
        v.push(10);
    });
    v.push(1000);

    handle.join().unwrap();
    println!("v: {v:?}");
}
```

What can we do to make it work?


```rust
use std::thread;
use std::sync::{Arc, Mutex};

fn main() {
    let v = Arc::new(Mutex::new(vec![10, 20, 30]));
    let v2 = Arc::clone(&v);

    let handle = thread::spawn(move || {
        let mut v2 = v2.lock().unwrap();
        v2.push(10);
    });

    {
        let mut v = v.lock().unwrap();
        v.push(1000);
    }

    handle.join().unwrap();
    println!("v: {v:#?}");
}
```

* `v` is wrapped in both `Arc` and `Mutex`, because their concerns are
  orthogonal.
  - Wrapping a `Mutex` in an `Arc` is a common pattern to share mutable state
    between threads.
* `v: Arc<_>` needs to be cloned as `v2` before it can be moved into another
  thread. Note `move` was added to the lambda signature.
* Blocks are introduced to narrow the scope of the `LockGuard` as much as
  possible.

### Exercises

Let us practice our new concurrency skills with:

#### Exercise 1

* Dining philosophers: a classic problem in concurrency.

```rust
use std::sync::{mpsc, Arc, Mutex};
use std::thread;
use std::time::Duration;

struct Fork;

struct Philosopher {
    name: String,
    left_fork: Arc<Mutex<Fork>>,
    right_fork: Arc<Mutex<Fork>>,
    thoughts: mpsc::SyncSender<String>,
}

impl Philosopher {
    fn think(&self) {
        self.thoughts
            .send(format!("Eureka! {} has a new idea!", &self.name))
            .unwrap();
    }

    fn eat(&self) {
        println!("{} is trying to eat", &self.name);
        let _left = self.left_fork.lock().unwrap();
        let _right = self.right_fork.lock().unwrap();

        println!("{} is eating...", &self.name);
        thread::sleep(Duration::from_millis(10));
    }
}

static PHILOSOPHERS: &[&str] =
&["Socrates", "Plato", "Aristotle", "Thales", "Pythagoras"];

fn main() {
    let (tx, rx) = mpsc::sync_channel(10);

    let forks = (0..PHILOSOPHERS.len())
        .map(|_| Arc::new(Mutex::new(Fork)))
        .collect::<Vec<_>>();

    for i in 0..forks.len() {
        let tx = tx.clone();
        let mut left_fork = Arc::clone(&forks[i]);
        let mut right_fork = Arc::clone(&forks[(i + 1) % forks.len()]);

        // To avoid a deadlock, we have to break the symmetry
        // somewhere. This will swap the forks without deinitializing
        // either of them
        if i == forks.len() - 1 {
            std::mem::swap(&mut left_fork, &mut right_fork);
        }

        let philosopher = Philosopher {
            name: PHILOSOPHERS[i].to_string(),
            thoughts: tx,
            left_fork,
            right_fork,
        };

        thread::spawn(move || {
            for _ in 0..10 {
                philosopher.eat();
                philosopher.think();
            }
        });
    }
    drop(tx);
    for thought in rx {
        println!("{thought}");
    }
}
```

* What's going on here? Does it make sense?
* We bring in the multiple producer single consumer, Atomic Reference counter,
  mutual exclusive primitive.
* We bring in threads and Duration.
* We build a basic Fork struct with no internal values.
* We also build up a Philosopher struct. That has the values name, left_fork,
  right_fork, and thoughts.
  - name: String
  - left_fork: Atomic reference with an internal mutual exclusive primitive with
    an internal Fork struct
  - right_fork: Atomic reference with an internal mutual exclusive primitive with
    an internal Fork struct
  - thoughts: multiple producer single consumer sync sender with an internal
    String
* We implement the Philosopher with two methods. Think and Eat. Both only taking
  in 1 value &self.
  - Think: We will create a send from `mpsc::SyncSender` with a new idea alert
    for the specific Philosopher by name.
  - Eat: We will print the philosopher is eating, with a lock for the left_fork
    and a lock for the right_fork. I'm not 100% sure what this is going to do
    fully and why. There will also be a line printed for the philosopher eating
    and a thread sleep for a 10 millisecond duration.
* We create a static array of slices including the philosophers names. This is
  created this way to have this exist for the life of the program. Not requiring
  data to be transferred, but accessed with a read only setup.

Now we start the program within `main`.

* We start our `sync_channel` with a buffer of 10.
* We start the forks that will loop through 0 to the length of the Philosophers
  slices. Which will be mapped with a Fork into a Mutex that is also inside of a Arc.
  Which will be collected into a Vector.
* Let's loop through the forks at this point. What is the point of creating and
  looping thought this vector? I'm not 100% sure. Seems as if it's just creating
  a loop that has forks in them. We may be able to do this with just a normal
  loop?
* We clone the tx and create the left and right forks as mutable variables. This
  allows for forks to be the same fork as other philosophers. Possibly creating
  possible deadlocks.
* We then run a function called `std::mem::swap` that will take references to
  the left and right forks. To allow for the breaking of the circular waiting
  condition. There is some magic going on in here. Not 100% sure how or why this
  works correctly.
* We create the philosopher with the data from inside of the loop with the left
  and right fork.
* We then create a thread that moves into a for loop that runs eat and think for
  each philosopher. Running 10 times for each philosopher.
* We then drop the tx in the main thread and then start going through the rx and
  print the thoughts out. This allows for the buffer to clear out and everything
  to keep printing.

This is the solution for the first challenge. It's a bit confusing and it has
some parts that might be a bit more involved than is needed. This is fine. This
just shows us different methods that can show how the internal work.

#### Exercise 2

* Multi-threaded link checker: a larger project where you'll use Cargo to
  download dependencies and then check links in parallel.

```rust
use std::{sync::Arc, sync::Mutex, sync::mpsc, thread};

use reqwest::{blocking::Client, Url};
use scraper::{Html, Selector};
use thiserror::Error;

#[derive(Error, Debug)]
enum Error {
    #[error("request error: {0}")]
    ReqwestError(#[from] reqwest::Error),
    #[error("bad http response: {0}")]
    BadResponse(String),
}

#[derive(Debug)]
struct CrawlCommand {
    url: Url,
    extract_links: bool,
}

fn visit_page(client: &Client, command: &CrawlCommand) -> Result<Vec<Url>, Error> {
    println!("Checking {:#}", command.url);
    let response = client.get(command.url.clone()).send()?;
    if !response.status().is_success() {
        return Err(Error::BadResponse(response.status().to_string()));
    }

    let mut link_urls = Vec::new();
    if !command.extract_links {
        return Ok(link_urls);
    }

    let base_url = response.url().to_owned();
    let body_text = response.text()?;
    let document = Html::parse_document(&body_text);

    let selector = Selector::parse("a").unwrap();
    let href_values = document
        .select(&selector)
        .filter_map(|element| element.value().attr("href"));
    for href in href_values {
        match base_url.join(href) {
            Ok(link_url) => {
                link_urls.push(link_url);
            }
            Err(err) => {
                println!("On {base_url:#}: ignored unparsable {href:?}: {err}");
            }
        }
    }
    Ok(link_urls)
}

struct CrawlState {
    domain: String,
    visited_pages: std::collections::HashSet<String>,
}

impl CrawlState {
    fn new(start_url: &Url) -> CrawlState {
        let mut visited_pages = std::collections::HashSet::new();
        visited_pages.insert(start_url.as_str().to_string());
        CrawlState {
            domain: start_url.domain().unwrap().to_string(),
            visited_pages,
        }
    }

    /// Determine whether links within the given page should be extracted
    fn should_extract_links(&self, url: &Url) -> bool {
        let Some(url_domain) = url.domain() else {
            return false;
        };
        url_domain == self.domain
    }

    /// Mark the given pages as visited, returning true if it had already
    /// been visited
    fn mark_visited(&mut self, url: &Url) -> bool {
        self.visited_pages.insert(url.as_str().to_string())
    }
}

type CrawlResult = Result<Vec<Url>, (Url, Error)>;
fn spawn_crawler_threads(
    command_receiver: mpsc::Receiver<CrawlCommand>,
    result_sender: mpsc::Sender<CrawlResult>,
    thread_count: u32,
) {
    let command_receiver = Arc::new(Mutex::new(command_receiver));

    for _ in 0..thread_count {
        let result_sender = result_sender.clone();
        let command_receiver = command_receiver.clone();
        thread::spawn(move || {
            let client = Client::new();
            loop {
                let command_result = {
                    let receiver_guard = command_receiver.lock().unwrap();
                    receiver_guard.recv()
                };
                let Ok(crawl_command) = command_result else {
                    // The sender got dropped. No more commands coming in.
                    break;
                };
                let crawl_result = match visit_page(&client, &crawl_command) {
                    Ok(link_urls) => Ok(link_urls),
                    Err(error) => Err((crawl_command.url, error)),
                };
                result_sender.send(crawl_result).unwrap();
            }
        });
    }
}

fn control_crawl(
    start_url: Url,
    command_sender: mpsc::Sender<CrawlCommand>,
    result_receiver: mpsc::Receiver<CrawlResult>,
) -> Vec<Url> {
    let mut crawl_state = CrawlState::new(&start_url);
    let start_command = CrawlCommand { url: start_url, extract_links: true };
    command_sender.send(start_command).unwrap();
    let mut pending_urls = 1;

    let mut bad_urls = Vec::new();
    while pending_urls > 0 {
        let crawl_result = result_receiver.recv().unwrap();
        pending_urls -= 1;

        match crawl_result {
            Ok(link_urls) => {
                for url in link_urls {
                    if crawl_state.mark_visited(&url) {
                        let extract_links = crawl_state.should_extract_links(&url);
                        let crawl_command = CrawlCommand { url, extract_links };
                        command_sender.send(crawl_command).unwrap();
                        pending_urls += 1;
                    }
                }
            }
            Err((url, error)) => {
                bad_urls.push(url);
                println!("Got crawling error: {:#}", error);
                continue;
            }
        }
    }
    bad_urls
}

fn check_links(start_url: Url) -> Vec<Url> {
    let (result_sender, result_receiver) = mpsc::channel::<CrawlResult>();
    let (command_sender, command_receiver) = mpsc::channel::<CrawlCommand>();
    spawn_crawler_threads(command_receiver, result_sender, 16);
    control_crawl(start_url, command_sender, result_receiver)
}

fn main() {
    let start_url = reqwest::Url::parse("https://www.google.org").unwrap();
    let bad_urls = check_links(start_url);
    println!("Bad URLs: {:#?}", bad_urls);
}
```

* What's going on here? Does it make sense?

I want to start from the very bottom and working the way up.

```rust
fn main() {
    let start_url = reqwest::Url::parse("https://www.google.org").unwrap();
    let bad_urls = check_links(start_url);
    println!("Bad URLs: {:#?}", bad_urls);
}
```

*  We will pull out the URL from `google.org` for our start URL.
*  We will create a bad_urls variable and use check_links with our start_url as
   the point.
* We print out the bad_urls

What does this even mean? What's really going on?

```rust
fn check_links(start_url: Url) -> Vec<Url> {
    let (result_sender, result_receiver) = mpsc::channel::<CrawlResult>();
    let (command_sender, command_receiver) = mpsc::channel::<CrawlCommand>();
    spawn_crawler_threads(command_receiver, result_sender, 16);
    control_crawl(start_url, command_sender, result_receiver)
}
```

The types/structs inside of the channels

```rust
type CrawlResult = Result<Vec<Url>, (Url, Error)>;

#[derive(Debug)]
struct CrawlCommand {
    url: Url,
    extract_links: bool,
}
```

* we create two multiple producers and single consumer channels. One with a
  CrawlResult and another with the CrawlCommand.
* We spawn_crawler_threads and send in the command receiver and the result
  sender. Along with 16 for the buffer size.
* We run control_crawl that takes in the start_url, the command sender and the
  result receiver.

```rust
fn spawn_crawler_threads(
    command_receiver: mpsc::Receiver<CrawlCommand>,
    result_sender: mpsc::Sender<CrawlResult>,
    thread_count: u32,
) {
    let command_receiver = Arc::new(Mutex::new(command_receiver));

    for _ in 0..thread_count {
        let result_sender = result_sender.clone();
        let command_receiver = command_receiver.clone();
        thread::spawn(move || {
            let client = Client::new();
            loop {
                let command_result = {
                    let receiver_guard = command_receiver.lock().unwrap();
                    receiver_guard.recv()
                };
                let Ok(crawl_command) = command_result else {
                    // The sender got dropped. No more commands coming in.
                    break;
                };
                let crawl_result = match visit_page(&client, &crawl_command) {
                    Ok(link_urls) => Ok(link_urls),
                    Err(error) => Err((crawl_command.url, error)),
                };
                result_sender.send(crawl_result).unwrap();
            }
        });
    }
}
```

* We take in the command receiver, result sender and thread count.
* We put our command receiver inside of a Arc and Mutex to pass around threads
* We loop through our thread count from 0 to the thread count number.
* Inside the loop we clone the sender for that thread.
* We also clone the receiver for each thread.
* Now we spawn a thread.
* We create a blocking Client from reqwest.
* Next we start a loop that will continue until if the command result doesn't
  end up in an error. If it errors there will be a break in the loop.
* Before the chance for the loop break. You create a receiver guard that locks
  the command receiver and unwraps it.
* We then attempt to open up the receiver on this thread. If that fails and
  errors it will break.
* If it's successful then the crawl_command will be reciever and the run a
  visit page. With a reference to the client and the crawl command. If it's
  successful it will return the link urls or if it error. It will reutrn the
  crawl_command url and the error inside of a tuple.
* It will take that crawl result and use the result_sender to send the crawl
  results.

```rust
fn visit_page(client: &Client, command: &CrawlCommand) -> Result<Vec<Url>, Error> {
    println!("Checking {:#}", command.url);
    let response = client.get(command.url.clone()).send()?;
    if !response.status().is_success() {
        return Err(Error::BadResponse(response.status().to_string()));
    }

    let mut link_urls = Vec::new();
    if !command.extract_links {
        return Ok(link_urls);
    }

    let base_url = response.url().to_owned();
    let body_text = response.text()?;
    let document = Html::parse_document(&body_text);

    let selector = Selector::parse("a").unwrap();
    let href_values = document
        .select(&selector)
        .filter_map(|element| element.value().attr("href"));
    for href in href_values {
        match base_url.join(href) {
            Ok(link_url) => {
                link_urls.push(link_url);
            }
            Err(err) => {
                println!("On {base_url:#}: ignored unparsable {href:?}: {err}");
            }
        }
    }
    Ok(link_urls)
}
```

* Let's explore the visit page since we go into this inside for the spawned
  crawler threads.
* We print checking the page we are visiting.
* We create a client get call and return a response. With this response we
  either return an error or we don't and move on.
* We create a vector for the new link urls.
* If there is not command for extract links we will return Ok with links_url.
* We then move to extract the body of the document that we returned and parse
  out the a tags. Pulling out a vector of href_value.
* We will then loop through those href values and joining the base_url with the
  href. If it comes back OK then we push the link_url to the link_urls vector we
  made earlier.
* If we error then we will print the error. After the loop we will return the
  link_urls.
* Let's move onto the control_crawl since we've setup the crawl threads.


```rust
fn control_crawl(
    start_url: Url,
    command_sender: mpsc::Sender<CrawlCommand>,
    result_receiver: mpsc::Receiver<CrawlResult>,
) -> Vec<Url> {
    let mut crawl_state = CrawlState::new(&start_url);
    let start_command = CrawlCommand { url: start_url, extract_links: true };
    command_sender.send(start_command).unwrap();
    let mut pending_urls = 1;

    let mut bad_urls = Vec::new();
    while pending_urls > 0 {
        let crawl_result = result_receiver.recv().unwrap();
        pending_urls -= 1;

        match crawl_result {
            Ok(link_urls) => {
                for url in link_urls {
                    if crawl_state.mark_visited(&url) {
                        let extract_links = crawl_state.should_extract_links(&url);
                        let crawl_command = CrawlCommand { url, extract_links };
                        command_sender.send(crawl_command).unwrap();
                        pending_urls += 1;
                    }
                }
            }
            Err((url, error)) => {
                bad_urls.push(url);
                println!("Got crawling error: {:#}", error);
                continue;
            }
        }
    }
    bad_urls
}
```

