---
title: 'Getting messy building software on a timeframe'
excerpt: 'Anytime you build something for production. You run into
limits. It could be time/money, reusability or many other business
complications. At times decisions need to be made. Decisions that will
have positive effects and negative effects. It is the nature of the
beast. Sometimes you have to get messy. To find out what works.'
coverImage: '/assets/blog/img_bin/exotic_horror_hallucination_1.png'
date: '2023-06-23T07:12:33.801Z'
author:
  name: 'Justin Bender'
  picture: '/assets/blog/authors/bender.png'
ogImage:
  url: '/assets/blog/img_bin/exotic_horror_hallucination_1.png'
---

# Getting messy building software on a timeframe

> âš ï¸ This is very high level. I'm writing this after already completing
most of the project. We are not going to get deep into code for this.
Just writing a bit about development experiences

> ðŸ›‘ There is a lot missing from this. No diagrams. Not deeper
understanding of each level. Just a basic high-level explanation of
how messy the plans for a project can be.

> ðŸ›‘ The biggest thing to do is just start building. Being flexible
and cutting costs where you can afford it. While focusing on the main
aspects you're trying to capture.


Everyone thinks about building the perfect application, but life is a
bit more complicated. Rarely, if ever, do thing go 100% your way. There
needs to be a level of flexibility.

We can take the example of building a demo for a fully featured
application. The demo just needs to work within the requirements. It
does not need to be fully extendable to a full application. So where do
you cut corners?

* Does it have to work with data?
* Does it need to only present fake data?
* Does it have to work on mobile?
* Does it have to work on desktop?
* Can you build re-usable components?
* Do you build each component separately?

You could go on for a while with every single requirement. At some point
you need to start it with a rough plan. Figuring out what is possible.
In the time frame that you have. We will go over a few scenarios that I
have personally attempted a few methods to make things work.

## Getting an opportunity

Sometimes life is fruitful and you get the opportunity to work on
projects. This one in particular is the opportunity to build a team to
help build an application. With a heavy focus on customer satisfaction
and retention, but the project needs to raise money.

We take an extremely simple demo using a static only setup. It's not the
best setup, or the cleanest design. That is fine. It get's the idea
across. Although as meeting are in session. Opinions come out and the
idea of creating a cleaner demo. Seems like a good way to go.

The complicated part is the time frame to build the app. It's a data
intensive application. So doing something like this in a 2 week time
frame. Is a bit much to expect full functionality. You also need to be
sure that anything you start. You can finish. This isn't always easy
with lots of moving data.

## Setting up the project and having the first meetings

At this point we need to setup the project idea, right. It seems like we
know a rough idea. We have the time frame that we would like to
accomplish the demo. Now we need to communicate with the team and get
something started. We start with a few basic tools.

* excalidraw
* diagrams
* flow charts

This gets the basic idea down, but leaves a list of questions.

* This is how the data moves
* This is how the data connects
* Do we connect the data? Or is that too large of a risk?
* Should we build the re-usable components?

We are almost repeating the same questions as above. We need to just
make a decision and move forward. Then adjust as needed.

## Making the decisions

Just using a JavaScript framework with TypeScript. We started a basic
application with a few pages. The first page is just going to be a link
to everything else. We can call this the `demo menu`. This will link the
business website, the user demo and the employee demo.

The first page is easy. That requires little work to setup. Not going to
spend any time on that. Let's move right to the `User Demo` page. Where
the mobile first idea is what we want to work with.

### Should we setup a context or any data structure storage?

I'm not convinced on this. Not yet. We just have set data structures that we
need to work with. The examples we have, are the examples we need to
use. This will also allow us to work on the components and expand the
data structure as needed. After we finish building each of the 3
different components/user flows. We can compare the data structures and
figure out if there is something that is missing from the other
examples.

This is because the data on the previous demo is a bit
scattered. Only 1 button works and we will be expanding that to have as
many buttons as possible. This is creating a slightly different data
structure than anticipated. It's larger.

Another notable decisions is the plan to make the data extremely
verbose. Instead of creating a reference array and using that all over.
I want to see where the expanding data is for database decisions in the
future. It's only a tiny bit of data for the demo. It can easily be
converted over to a reference array.

So it seems like the decisions for the data structures is going to be as
we build. With a debrief at the end on how we can optimize the data
structure based on the 3 different demo component work flows. Now we
know that each component needs to deal with the data is holds. No
external data sources yet. We can move on to the front end for the user.

## Getting setup to build the user frontend demo

We now want to start building more on the demo. The focus is the mobile
view on the User side. With a dashboard that takes in user information
on the opposite side of the spectrum. The employee dashboard side, does
not, need to be mobile friendly. There is too much data being presented.

Let's get started and build a basic button structure the layers on top
of each other. Next to another table of information about the User data.
All the easy parts. Two boxes, one with text information and the other
with buttons. Nothing too hard for the first page. Light work.

It's going to be the next page. The page with a table of information.
But not just a table of information. Buttons that also need to be
clickable.

### What problems are we experiencing here?

You might not be able to see it, but we have some problems brewing. Some
decisions that must be made to move forward. This is fine. That was the
plan the whole time. Keep building until you need to figure out the next
step.

* How do we design the page to have a data table?
* What does it look like on different screens?
* Is the CSS consistent or is it messy on breaks?
* How should it be reactive to medium and large screens?

This part of the design process. Has a bit of experimentation with it.
Different methods of attaching and scrolling around the screen will be
tested out. Not only tested on the browser and the mobile dev tools.
It's also tested on my personal phone. Inside of browser wrapper like
Linkedin and Discord.

#### How do I write about he decisions without getting to boring?

The design we ended up setting on is using a table that becomes fixed at
the bottom. This will allow us to attach this to a view height. This
view height will adjust based on the view it's displayed on. At first it
will only check for the width. This isn't the only struggle with the
styling that we will have. There will be the aspect of the height. This
height factor changes on every phone and within different browsers. This
adds complications.

Another complication that's going to come up a lot for the mobile
screens. Is double scrolling bars inside of a mobile view. This is a
dangerous setup. Very easy to get bugs from jumping around. Honestly,
this is the most annoying aspect. Since the testing isn't just on
browser, but actual phones. Which usually show a few bugs that need to
be addressed.

#### Frontend stresses me out. There is usually a give and take

You want something and you can't have the whole cake. That's fine,
because this is life. Life is always about having to choose between the
best available option. Even after I have finished the basic setup. There
is still 1 or 2 different bugs I can find on certain phone screens.

We need to also remember that there is a time frame on the project. It's
not something that can be worked on forever. It's something that is
supposed to take 1 or 2 weeks to complete to a useable state.

### Now we have to basic setup going. What's next?

Time to put the rest of the logic into place. I want to reiterate again.
That this isn't a fully connected and functional application. It's a
demo that has a fake functionality. So that others can use it to show as
an example.

* Multi Level User Section
* Employee Dashboard Section

## Why does a simple project seem so complex?

At times I feel, the frontend work is slow. There are other layers
involved in the process. It's not just building a frontend that works.

* building for desktop
* building for mobile
* desktop testing
* mobile testing

There are other rules that we will follow. We can imagine those as,
software developer expectations.

