---
title: 'Why do I choose TypeScript when starting new projects'
excerpt: 'When starting a new project that is JavaScript based. I have
the habit of using TypeScript now. But I do not use all the fancy
features of TypeScript. I really only use it for simple to follow type
checking. With a fear that the future will bring breaking changings.'
coverImage: '/assets/blog/img_bin/mj_gods_1.jpg'
date: '2023-06-21T10:37:53.039Z'
author:
  name: 'Justin Bender'
  picture: '/assets/blog/authors/bender.png'
ogImage:
  url: '/assets/blog/img_bin/mj_gods_1.jpg'
---

# Why do I choose TypeScript when starting new projects

You can do everything you need with JavaScript. When I mean everything.
I mean everything. It's very similar to how Python is. You can get away
with a lot, but produce a small amount of code. This is a wonderful
feature. This isn't the only feature that we want in production.

At some point in a production build. You might want more control over
the movement of the data. With less work from you. Using TypeScript
types, you can use this tooling. In comparison. If you wanted to have in
code type checking. That could also work, but we tend to go for the
least amount of code possible.

## Doesn't TypeScript turn into JavaScript?

Yes, TypeScript isn't a new language. It's a layer on top of JavaScript
that adds types. When you get the returned code. You get normal
JavaScript. The real power comes from the linters.

Would you like the ability to be warned. That you're using a `String`
where you should be using a `Number`. Or would you like the code to have
the extra checks? It's really a choice of tooling. There are a few
reason you might be opposed to the TypeScript method.

* You can do it with JavaScript.
* You can do it with JavaScript and it's faster (possibly).
* You can do it with JavaScript and learning TypeScript is hard.

I hear the concerts. Why use something if you don't need it?

Maybe you shouldn't but I enjoy the extra checking. It's one of the
reasons I have a slight obsession with `Rust` and other strongly typed
languages. Where using specific data types. Changes entire algorithms.
While using languages like JavaScript/TypeScript. The smaller level data
types are abstracted away to a larger value covering `u8`, `i8`, `u32`, `i32`,
`u64`, `i64`. Where you don't have to worry about any of those. Just that
it's a `Number`.

You can even compare Strings and Numbers in JavaScript. `5 == "5"` will
be truthy. Which means, that it returns `true`. Even though `5` is not
the same is `"5"`. They are completely different types.

Let's go over that one more time. The `==` value is checking for
comparison. Not checking if the type is the same. The way to check for
the same type is `===`. Three `=` in a row. Now if you tried `5 === "5"`
this will return `false`.

### It seems like you could get away with just using JavaScript

I would agree and at times I would prefer to use JavaScript. The
benefits may not outweigh the loss. If the code is just JavaScript on
the server. I might choose just to use JavaScript. If the code involves
a Transpiled front-end. I might choose TypeScript.

#### This isn't a catch all. Sometimes I still use JavaScript

I'm not really working to convince you to use TypeScript yet. So far. It
seems like you can get away without ever touching it. Now let's go into
why it's powerful and useful.

## What make TypeScript stand out?

* Everyone seems to be using it. It must be cool!
* Explicitly creating types to pass around.
* Explicit design structure.
* Extra checks on the code before it's transpiled/minified.
* JavaScript code is still processed heavily. So the cost in conversation speed is
  negligible.

---

## Going over some Next.JS examples in TypeScript

Next.js provides a TypeScript-first development experience for building
React applications.

In comes with built-in TypeScript support for automatically installing
the necessary packages and configuring the proper settings.

> Minimum TypeScript version is at least `v4.5.2` to get syntax features
such as `type modifiers and import names` and `performance improvements`

* Static Generation and Server-side Rendering types.

```javascript
import { GetStaticProps, GetStaticPaths, GetServerSideProps } from 'next';

export const getStaticProps: GetstaticProps = async (context) => {
  const postData = await getPostData(params?.id as String);
  return {
    props: {
      postData
    }
  }
}

export const getStaticPaths: GetStaticPaths = async () => {
  const paths = getAllPostIds();
  return {
    paths,
    fallback: false
  }
}

export const getServerSideProps: GetServerSideProps = async (context) => {
  // ..
}
```

* Next Api Requests and Responses

```javascript
import { NextApiRequest, NextApiResponse } from 'next';

export default (_: NextApiRequest, res: NextApiResponse) => {
  res.status(200).json({ text: 'Hello' });
}

export const hander(req: NextApiRequest, res: NextApiResponse) => {
  res.status(200).json({ name: 'John Doe' });
}
```

You can also choose to type the responses using the `generics`

```javascript
import { NextApiRequest, NextApiResponse } from 'next';

type Data = {
  name: string
}

export default function handler(
  req: NextApiRequest,
  res: NextApiResponse<Data>
) {
  res.status(200).json({ name: 'John Doe' });
}
```

We will also take another example of a Next.js component from their blog
example.

```javascript
export default function Post({
  postData
}: {
  postData: {
    title: string
    date: string
    contentHtml: string
  }
}) {
  return (
    <Layout>
      <Head>
        <title>{postData.title}</title>
      </Head>
      <article>
        <h1 className={utilStyles.headingXl}>{postData.title}</h1>
        <div className={utilStyles.lightText}>
          <Date dateString={postData.date} />
        </div>
        <div dangerouslySetInnerHTML={{ __html: postData.contentHtml }} />
      </article>
    </Layout>
  )
}
```

I just want to talk about the benefits when reading this code. Immediately I understand what data is supposed to be which data. This is something I personally appreciate. The ability to look at the code. While understanding the flow of the data. This is the very top level and the main reason that everything going forward is going to be in TypeScript when I can.

We should go a bit deeper into TypeScript and the powers that it can produce.
