---
title: 'Typing is a challenge. How do you start practicing?'
excerpt: 'Typing is a skill that has to be learned. Having a solid base
and good muscle memory is what we are building up to. So it is counter
productive to switch around to multiple typing styles. It may be better
to practice one. I mean the new WPM record is 300 now. Most cannot even
break 40 words per minute.'
coverImage: '/assets/blog/img_bin/typing_love_infinity.png'
date: '2023-06-25T23:35:04.854Z'
author:
  name: 'Justin Bender'
  picture: '/assets/blog/authors/bender.png'
ogImage:
  url: '/assets/blog/img_bin/typing_love_infinity.png'
---

# Typing is a challenge. How do you start practicing?

> 🛑 I can only give insight into my own experience. There might be
better ways to practice.
>
> 🛑 I created bad habits. That will take me years to unlearn.
Muscle memory is very important to this process.

At a young age when you're using the computer all of the time. It's easy
to learn just from typing. One of the hardest habits to break is having
to look down at the keyboard. But how can you stop that?

### How do you prevent looking down?

Honestly you're going to have to take the time to learn where the keys
are. While you're not looking. This is a bit of a challenge. Let's be
perfectly honest. This is going to be one of the biggest challenges.

* Keyboard changes
* Not practicing the basics

There will be aspects that prevent you from being able to gain a solid
muscle memory. Two that I listed above. If you want the best results.
You want the tools that best fit the task.

A popular method is the home row method. Google it and learn more about
it. It's a place on the keyboard where you hands it. You use that base
to memorize where the other keys are.

I can give some recommendations, but the tools are the best ones for
you. My tools of choice have limitations to how it allows me to work.
When you might want to choose a different solution from me. That allow
you to work on a laptop. I can also use a laptop. It just feels like it
takes 5x more effort to type. The keys aren't lined up well on a normal
keyboard. In my opinion.

### My split keyboard personal choices

* MoErgo Glove80 Wireless Split
  <https://www.moergo.com/>
* Kinesis Advantage360 Split
  <https://kinesis-ergo.com/keyboards/advantage360/>

### My alternative selections

* Drop ALT Mechanical Keyboard
  <https://drop.com/buy/drop-alt-mechanical-keyboard>
* Apple Magic Keyboard
  <https://www.apple.com/shop/product/MK2A3LL/A/magic-keyboard-us-english>

---

## Why different keyboard choices?

Well I don't want to pressure you into moving to a split keyboard. I
don't think it's for everyone. It's going to change the entire dynamic
of how you interact with technology. My personal choice is the split
keyboard option. I have access to the Kinesis Advantage 360, but I might
buy the glove80 next. Especially if I can get them to put hotswap
connectors.

### What to do after you get your keyboard of choice?

The basic laptop keyboard is also fine. The one thing we should bring up
the your wrists. You'll want to do some research on a good wrist
positions. If the keyboard is raised. You're going to want some sort of
support over along period of time. This is why people like the magic
apple keyboards. These lay practically flat on the table. Allowing you
to rest your whole arm on the table if you'd like.

One of the best ways to learn how to type better is going to be, typing.
Who would have guess it. The ability to type the keys that you want, is
going to come with practice. The more practice. The more muscle memory
is built up. The easier it is to forget about typing and focus on the
words/letters.

My go to website for typing practice is actually
[Monkeytype](https://monkeytype.com/). I'll be honest. It's
overwhelming. The website has so many option. You don't really know how
to practice typing. You can make it strict to the point. It fails on
each incorrect letter. Or it can be as easy as possible. Where it won't
let you go forward. Unless you type the correct key. The way you
practice is completely customizable.

> Most people get a bit overwhelmed with options. So I can give a few
suggestions to help make decisions. I'll share some of the habits I
started using and what seemed to work the best.

Some recommendations I can give you is using `stop on letter` in the
beginning. This will force you to click the correct letter to continue.
Your WPM will suffer, gut you'll start to learn more of the muscle
memory to continue further. Another habit you can do. Is repeating all
the words you got wrong. These settings are a bit harder to find, but
they also exist on the monkeytype website.

If you want a real challenge where you fail more than you pass. You can
try setting the failure rate. You can create a minimum WPM, a minimum
accuracy, fail on any incorrect letter press. You have the ability to
make the process as stressful or easy as you need to. That is the power
of MonkeyType. Possibly one of my favorite websites around. It's also
opensourced. So anyone can use it locally.

### Mistakes in learning over the years

One of my biggest mistakes is the use of a keyboard that used different
layers called the [Vortex
Core](https://mechanicalkeyboards.com/shop/index.php?l=product_list&c=375).
It's honestly the most adorable keyboard ever. I love it. It's fun and
it's setup so nicely to work right away. The only downside is the fact
that you build a muscle memory around it. At this point. I lost a lot of
the normal keyboard habits. Filled with habits that felt better to me.

This loss of consistency. Was the beginning of the confusion in my
brain. After a while. I wouldn't want to use a normal keyboard. I only
wanted to use the 40% keyboard. So when I wanted to start working on
typing speed. Going to a large keyboard. Now I wanted to use the symbols
in the first layer. Not having to click 3 keys.

At this point. Years of training on a keyboard is now coming to haunt
me. While you try to type fast. You accidently go back to old habits.
Messing up the typing practice along the way.

## Muscle Memory is key

The real training that you're doing is muscle memory training. When you
see the letter. You want to instantly know where the finger goes to make
that letter appear on the screen. This is actually a bit of a challenge
at first. It might take some people years. Might only take a child a
week. It all depends on the person, where they are in their development
cycle and how many bad habits you've picked up.

* Pick you tool
* Stick with your tool and build the muscle memory
* Add on more features to the tooling you use

## Keep practicing

The training I had to do when I was relearning how to type on a regular
keyboard took months of training hours a day. At one point I was
practicing typing for two house a day everyday. It was a bit of a pain,
but the results were there. At one point my max typing speed was 140
WPM. That changed when I switched to a split keyboard. That made my WPM
drop by about half. I can barely get to 100 WPM now. That is my highest
score at the moment.

After you've practiced for a while. That really isn't enough to get you
understanding what you're typing. You'll have to start taking notes with
the news skills you're building. One point I chose to start typing out
documentation for practice. This was a challenge. Since I would type
words wrong a lot and have to edit them. This was stressful, but
educational.

Now I attempt to write blog posts. I struggle with completing full
topics in a reasonable amount of time. I expected that and it's no
excuse not to start. I'll just have to deal with the messy work. Until I
finally learn how to get better at the work that I produce. Honestly I
don't think I'm the best writer, but it's not up to me. It's up to the
readers of the article.

It keeps me typing and attempting to get the words that I'm thinking
down in a screen as accurate as possible. The real struggle of the
connection is having to process the words while also typing them out.
When you're just using typing practice. You don't have to understand the
word, make sure it's spelled correctly and keep going with then next
work. It's a skill that will have to be learned over time. That is the
honest truth.

## How can I help you practice more?

I wish I knew what I could do to help you get excited about typing. It's
one of those things that you appreciate immensely after you've put in
the time. Before you have the skills it looks like magic. It feels
like magic too, but you have to train to get there. I do believe in you.

### Try to do it in reasonable chunks

You want to train but you don't want to overtrain. The idea is getting
the muscle memory as quickly as possible. It's going to depend on the
goal that you specifically have. Do you want an extremely high word per
minute. Do you want to be able to take notes at the speed of an
instructor? The goal you have is the one you should work on.

The beauty of monkey type is the fact that you can make the setting
around the needs that you want. I don't want to repeat myself too much.
I just want to reiterate that there are some fantastic tooling to
personalize your training.

---

## Typing at least 2000 words a day

We can make a challenge. To type at least 2000 words per day. Words that
you intentionally wrote down. Not just typing practice words. That could
be in addition too. We don't want to get in the habit of only being able
to copy words. We want to be able to understand and type the words in
your brain onto the screen.

Today I'm writing about how you can write better and how you can train.
It's only about 2000 words on this page today. I have some other work to
accomplish. But typing as much as possible and hitting 2000 words a day.
It the goal we are going to set for now. If you can go over the 2000
words. That's awesome, but remember. You want to also let you brain go
into a rest state.

### What to write about

Finding something to write about might be a challenge. It is for me.
Right now I don't want to become too boring, but I'm also not sure how
I can offer much more education on the topic. Or how much deeper you
would like to listen. I've given most of the methods I've used above at
a very high level. Partially avoiding giving you all the answers. I
don't know all the answers. So I won't come at you like an expert, but
you might choose to listen to my past experiences and learn from them.

* Muscle memory is important
* Practice takes time
* Train your brain, not just your fingers
* Keep up the good work
* 40 WPM max is fine, just keep practicing one day you break 100

---

## Words of support

If typing is something that you want to do. It might be frustrating to
learn slowly. I can promise you that it's worth it. It's not going to be
quick. Nothing incredible in life is easy. The work is what makes it
magical. When you've trained for 10 years. When people with no skill
watch you. You become magical in their eyes 🧙. Just keep up the
good work and build up the muscle memory. You'll start getting over 100
wpm max in no time.
