---
title: 'What is the Cosmos Network and what is CosmWasm?'
excerpt: 'Today we look a bit into what the Cosmos Network is on the
basic layers. We may also look at CosmWASM and the basics of using it.'
coverImage: '/assets/blog/img_bin/cosmos_blockchain_blank.png'
date: '2023-06-17T22:15:22.828Z'
author:
  name: 'Justin Bender'
  picture: '/assets/blog/authors/bender.png'
ogImage:
  url: '/assets/blog/img_bin/cosmos_blockchain_blank.png'
---

# What is the Cosmos Network and what is CosmWasm?

> Building on the Interchain

Cosmos apps and services connect using the Inter-Blockchain
Communication protocol (IBC). This innovations apparently enables you
to freely exchange assets and data across sovereign,
**decentralized** blockchains.

* 246 Apps and Services and growing
* `$48 Billion` Digital assets under management
* Interoperability and autonomy over siloes and monopolies
* Collaboration and innovation over competition and status quo
* Exchange, store and secure between parties. Without relying on
  centralized servers. Cosmos Hub is the **first?** fully free
  blockchain to enable this

### Empowering Developer

* Build entirely autonomous application-specific blockchains that can
  easily interconnect
* Not forced to exist as smart contracts on someone else's chain
* Can opt-out of high transaction fees and network congestion
* Make your own rules and scale for mainstream adoption.

This has massive implications for the future of decentralized finance
(DeFi), non-fungible tokens (NFTs), gaming, autonomous organizations,
social networks, marketplaces, and the sustainable growth of blockchain
technology, the internet of value, and ownership economy in which
everyone has a stake.

Instead of one million blockchain apps competing for throughput on a
single base layer, why not one million blockchain apps interconnected
across one million sovereign blockchains? This is what's possible with
Cosmos.

---

#### Organizations

* Interchain apps and services give your community the power to organize
  and allocate resources to its members.
* Individuals can use tokes to vote on impactful decisions that govern
  their own community.
* Imagine having transparency into how your local
  government spends your tax money, and even voting on where it goes.

#### Social networks

* Free flow of information and freedom of expressions have been hindered
  by centralized platforms censoring and filtering content and
  extracting value from their users.
* The interchain powers communities to build autonomous social networks
  in which every user can have a voice, create value, and benefit from
  the value creation of others.


#### Marketplaces

* Developers can create exchanges and marketplaces allowing for
  permission-less global trade.
* Can create autonomous application-specific blockchains rather than
  smart contracts on someone else's chain.
* Frees users from high transaction fees and network congestion. Making Defi accessible to all.


#### Games

* Allows game developers to create unique collectibles and character
  upgrades that they can monetize without third-party approval or app
  store fees.
* Through NFTs, these digital assets live forever, providing lasting
  value for gamers, and creating endless opportunities.

---

### Is there a token?

* Secured by the ATOM token.
* Cosmos Hub was the first blockchain to launch of on the interchain,
  and the first of thousand of sovereign, interoperating blockchains.

The Cosmos Hub is designed to be a service provider to the chains that
connect to it. A vast decentralized marketplace that provides a wealth
of value-added services, such as shared security, a decentralized
interchain exchange, bridges to Ethereum (ETH) and Bitcoin (BTC), and
secure custodianship of digital assets.

All these services create powerful incentives for other sovereign chains
to connect and transfer assets to the Cosmos Hub, driving it's utility.
Just like a port city is valued by the amount of trade that flows through
it, the Cosmos Hub's value is measured by the blockchain economies that
conduct business on the Hub through IBC.

#### Secured by the ATOM

* ATOM token is the native token on the Cosmos Hub.
* In return for securing the Hub's services by staking ATOM,
  transaction fees and staking rewards are distributed to the Cosmos
  Hub.
* Rewards are set to exponentially increase with the introduction of
  additional services such as the interchain decentralized exchange
  (Gravity DEX) and interchain Staking which will allow staking ATOM to
  secure other blockchains in the ecosystem.
* [Staking](https://cosmos.network/learn/get-atom/)
* [What is Staking?](https://cosmos.network/learn/staking)

---

#### Interchain Technology

The interchain vision is underpinned by robust interoperable technology
that makes the Internet of Blockchains possible. Before the interchain,
blockchains maintained a mainframe "supercomputer" approach that left
them siloed and unable to communicate with each other. They were also
hard to build and had limited transaction throughput.

This energy-guzzling inefficient time sharing model is not scalable. We
designed a Proof-of-Stake (PoS) consensus mechanism that achieves high
performance with low energy consumption and makes it easy for anyone to
build a sovereign blockchain and connect it to our burgeoning network.

Take a deeper dive with the technology introduction to the [interchain
stack](https://v1.cosmos.network/intro).

#### CometBFT

A state machine replication engine for reliable, secure,
large-scale, application-specific blockchains.

* [Documentation CometBFT](https://docs.cometbft.com/)

#### Cosmos SDK

The industry standard for building blockchains, Cosmos SDK is built to
deliver the best in decentralized technologies: speed. Transaction
throughput and latency are core components, and speed is what matters
most--no one wants to pay a fee to have their transaction take hours or
even days to confirm.

* [Documentation Cosmos SDK](https://docs.cosmos.network/main)

#### IBC

The standard protocol for inter blockchain communication, IBC allows
blockchains in the ecosystem to connect so that they can transfer tokens
and other data between each other frictionlessly and seamlessly.

* [Learn more on IBC](https://ibcprotocol.dev/)

* [Ready to build - Developer Portal](https://tutorials.cosmos.network/)

#### CLI

Build on top of Cosmos SDK, the world's most popular blockchain
framework. Ignite CLI is the fastest way from zero to mainnet,
accelerating chain development by scaffolding everything you need so you
can focus on business logic.

* [Start building - Ignite Cli](https://ignite.com/cli)

* [Explore the Ecosystem](https://cosmos.network/intro/ecosystem/apps)

---

# What is CosmWasm?

Smart contract platform focused on `security`, `performance`, and
`interoperability`. It is the only smart contracting platform for public
blockchains with heavy adoption outside of the EVM world.

#### Secure

CosmWasm's architecture prevents almost all the known risk vectors of
Ethereum.

* Why is security important?

Look at all the DeFi hacking that happened before, which we have not see
so far with CosmWasm.

#### Powerful

CosmWasm runs the Web Assembly, Wasm virtual machine guarantees high
performance.

* Why is performance crucial?

Wasm upgrades makes thing more powerful. Everything is cost-effective.
Not only Cosmos offers high performance, but also 10k transaction per
second; you do the math!

* Once you write the contract, with the Wasm upgrade, you get more performance without doing anything.


#### Interoperable

CosmWasm was built for multi-chain, cross-chain world, deeply integrated
with IBC (Inter-blockchain communication).

* Why does interoperability matter?

When you keep your money in your bank, you can easily send it to your
friend who has another bank. In the crypto world, it should work the
same. Your coin and/or NFT on chain A should be easily moved to chain B
seamlessly.

Not only that, you can imagine all the crazy stuff in the multi-chain
future: a DAO on Juno chain can mint an NFT on Stargaze chain, then LP
their treasury on Osmosis, and exchange it with Ethereum over Axelar.
All of these things can happen, thanks to CosmWasm.

* [CosmWasm](https://cosmwasm.com/)
