---
title: 'Looking deeper into development with CosmWASM 1/3'
excerpt: 'The first step in a process. To look into the building and
development using CosmWasm. How to start developing with it, testing and
even about deploying to a network.'
coverImage: '/assets/blog/img_bin/cosm_wasm_deeper_dive.png'
date: '2023-06-18T01:09:47.237Z'
author:
  name: 'Justin Bender'
  picture: '/assets/blog/authors/bender.png'
ogImage:
  url: '/assets/blog/img_bin/cosm_wasm_deeper_dive.png'
---

# Looking deeper into development with CosmWASM 1/3

We are going to go right into the book. It's almost going to be word for
word. The best way for use to understand it to just read what the
creators think we should, hah. I hope. If it's horrible, we are going to
just have to look at the examples.

### Prerequisites

While we explore CosmWasm smart contracts. We will be using Rust
compiled to WASM. You should understand Rust.

* [Rust Programming Language](https://www.rust-lang.org/)

### API Documentation

* [cosmwasm-std](https://crates.io/crates/cosmwasm-std)
* [cw-storage-plus](https://crates.io/crates/cw-storage-plus)
* [cw-multi-test](https://crates.io/crates/cw-multi-test)
* [cw-utils](https://crates.io/crates/cw-utils)
* [sylvia framework](https://crates.io/crates/sylvia)

---

## Setting up the environment

Working with CosmWasm smart contracts, you will need rust installed on
your machine. If you don't have one, you can find installation
instructions on the [the Rust
website](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install).

We expect you to be using the Stable Rust channel in this. Additionally,
you will need the wasm rust compiler backend installed to build wasm
binaries. To install it, run:

```rust
rustup target add wasm32-unknown-unknown
```

Optionally if you want to try out your contracts on a testnet, you will
need to [wasmd](https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmd) binary. We would
focus on testing contracts with Rust unit testing utility throughout the
book, so it is not required to follow. However, seeing the product
working in a real-world environment may be nice.

* Install [golang](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki#working-with-go)
* `git clone git@github.com:CosmWasm/wasmd.git`
* `cd ./wasmd`
* `make install`

To be able to upload Rust Wasm Contracts into the blockchain, you will
need to install [docker](https://www.docker.com/). To minimize your
contract sizes, it will be required to run CosmWasm Rust Optimizer;
without that, more complex contracts might exceed a size limit.

---

### Cosmwasm-check utility

* Check if the wasm binary is a proper smart contract ready for
  blockchain upload.
* `cargo install cosmwasm-check`
* If successful you should be able to execute the utility from your
  command line. `cosmwasm-check --version`

```rust
Contract checking 1.2.3
```

### Verifying the installation

To guarantee you are ready to build your smart contracts, you need to
make sure you can build examples. Checkout the
[cw-plus](https://github.com/CosmWasm/cw-plus) repository and run the
testing command in its folder:

* `git clone git@github.com:CosmWasm/cw-plus.git`
* `cd ./cw-plus`
* `cargo test`

You should see that everything in the repository gets compiled, and all
tests pass.

`cw-plus` is a great place to find example contracts - look for them in
`contracts` directory. The repository in maintained by CosmWasm
creators, so contracts in there should follow good practices.

To verify the `cosmwasm-check` utility, first, you need to build a smart
contract. Go to some contract directory, for example,
`contracts/cw1-whitelist`, and call `cargo wasm`:

* `cd contracts/cw1-whitelist`
* `cargo wasm`

You should be able to find you output binary in the
`target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/release/` of the root repo directory -
not in the contract directory itself. Now you can check if contract
validation passes:

`cosmwasm-check ../../target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/release/cw1_whitelist.wasm`

```rust
Available capabilities: {"iterator", "cosmw
asm_1_1", "cosmwasm_1_2", "stargate", "stak
ing"}

../../target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/release
/cw1_whitelist.wasm: pass

All contracts (1) passed checks!
```

# Quick start with `wasmd`

`Wasmd` is used to test you smart contracts on the actual blockchain.

### Testnet setup

To interact with a blockchain test net, the first thing to do is pick
one. I suggest our generic CosmWasm test net malaga-420. As `wasmd` is
configured via environment variables, we will start with creating a
`malaga.env` file that sets them to proper values:

```bash
export CHAIN_ID="malaga-420"
export TESTNET_NAME="malaga-420"
export FEE_DENOM="umlg"
export STAKE_DENOM="uand"
export BECH32_HRP="wasm"
export WASMD_VERSION="v0.27.0"
export CONFIG_DIR=".wasmd"
export BINARY="wasmd"

export
GENESIS_URL="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CosmWasm/testnets/master/ma
laga-420/config/genesis.json"

export RPC="https://rpc.malaga-420.cosmwasm.com:443"
export FAUCET="https://faucet.malaga-420.cosmwasm.com"

export COSMOVISOR_VERSION="v0.42.10"
export COSMOVISOR_HOME=/root/.wasmd
export COSMOVISOR_NAME=wasmd

export NODE=(--node $RPC)
export TXFLAG=($NODE --chain-id $CHAIN_ID --gas-prices 0.05umlg --gas
auto --gas-
adjustment 1.3)
```

If you are a fish user, this `malaga.fish` file may fit you better:

```bash
set -x CHAIN_ID malaga-420
set -x TESTNET_NAME malaga-420
set -x FEE_DENOM umlg
set -x STAKE_DENOM uand
set -x BECH32_HRP wasm
set -x WASMD_VERSION v0.27.0
set -x CONFIG_DIR .wasmd
set -x BINARY wasmd

set -x GENESIS_URL
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CosmWasm/testnets/master/mal
aga-420/config/genesis.json

set -x RPC https://rpc.malaga-420.cosmwasm.com:443
set -x FAUCET https://faucet.malaga-420.cosmwasm.com

set -x COSMOVISOR_VERSION v0.42.10
set -x COSMOVISOR_HOME /root/.wasmd
set -x COSMOVISOR_NAME wasmd

set -x NODE $RPC
set -x TXFLAG --node $RPC --chain-id $CHAIN_ID --gas-prices 0.05umlg
--gas-adjust
ment 1.3 --gas auto -b block
```

Now source the file to our environment (for fish use `malaga.fish` in
place of `malaga.env`):

* `source ./malaga.env`

---

### Preparing account

The first thing you need to interact with the testnet is a valid
account. Start with adding a new key to the `wasmd` configuration:

* `wasmd keys add wallet`

```bash
- name: wallet
  type: local
  address: wasm1wukxp2kldxae36rgjz28umqtq792twtxdfe6ux
  pubkey: '{"@type":"/cosmos.crypto.secp256k1.PubKey","key":"A8pamTZH8x8+8UAFjndr
vU4x7foJbCvcz78buyQ8q7+k"}'
  mnemonic: ""
```

As a result of this command, you get information about just the prepared
account. Two thing are relevant here:

* address is your identity n the blockchain
* mnemonic (omitted by myself in the example) is 12 words that allow you
  to recreate an account so you can use it, for example, from a
  different machine

For testing purposes, storing the mnemonic is probably never necessary,
but it is critical information to keep safe in the real world.

Now, when you create an account, you have to initialize it with some
tokens - you will need them to pay for any interaction with blockchain
-we call this the "gas cost" of an operation. Usually, you would need to
buy those tokens somehow, but in testnets, you can typically create as
many token as you want on your accounts. To do so on malaga network,
invoke:

```bash
curl -X POST --header "Content-Type: application/json" --data '{ "denom": "umlg", "address": "wasm1wukxp2kldxae36rgjz28u  q792twtxdfe6ux" }' https://faucet.malaga-420.cosmwasm.com/credit
```

It is a simple HTTP POST request to the
`https://faucet.malaga-420.cosmwasm.com/credit` endpoint. The data of
this request is a JSON containing the name of a token to mint and the
address which it should receive new tokens. Here we are minting `umlg`
tokens, which are tokens used to pay gas fees int eh malaga testnet.

You can verify you account tokens balance by invoking (substituting my
address with yours):

```bash
$ wasmd query bank balances wasm1wukxp2kldxae36rgjz28umqtq792twtxdf
x
balances:
- amount: "100000000"
  denom: umlg
pagination:
  next_key: null
  total: "0"
```

100M tokens should be plenty for playing around, and if you need more, you can always mint another batch.

---

## Interacting with testnet

Blockchain interaction is performed using the `wasmd` command-line tool. To start working with the testnet, we need to upload some smart contract code. For now, we would use an example, `cw4-group` from the `cw-plus` repository. Start with cloning it:

```bash
git clone git@github.com:CosmWasm/cw-plus.git
```

Now we go into the cloned repo and run Rust optimizer on it:

```bash
docker run --rm -v "$(pwd)":/code \
--mount type=volume,source="$(basename "$(pwd)")_cache",target=/code/target \
--mount type=volume,source=registry_cache,target=/usr/local/cargo/registry \
cosmwasm/workspace-optimizer:0.12.6
```

After a couple of minutes - it can take some for the first time - you should have an `artifact` directory in your repo, and there should be a `cw4-group.wasm` file being the contract we want to upload. To do so, run - note that `wallet` is name of the key you created in the previous chapter:

```bash
wasmd tx wasm store ./artifacts/cw4_group.wasm --from wallet $TXF LAG -y -b block

...
logs:
- events:
  - attributes:
    - key: action
      value: /cosmwasm.wasm.v1.MsgStoreCode
    - key: module
      value: wasm
    - key: sender
      value: wasm1wukxp2kldxae36rgjz28umqtq792twtxdfe6ux
    type: message
  - attributes:
    - key: code_id
      value: "12"
    type: store_code
...
```

As a result of execution, you should get a pretty long output with information about what happened. Most of this is an ancient cipher (aka base64) with execution metadata, but what we are looking for is the `logs` section. There should be an event called `store_code`, with a single attribute `code_id` - its `value` field is the code id of our uploaded contract - 12 in my case.

Now, when we have our code uploaded, we can go forward and instantiate a contract to create its new instance:

```bash
wasmd tx wasm instantiate 12 \
'{ "admin": "wasm1wukxp2kldxae36rgjz28umqtq792twtxdfe6ux", "members": [] }' \
--from wallet --label "Group" --no-admin $TXFLAG -y

...
logs:
- events:
  - attributes:
    - key: _contract_address
      value: wasm18yn206ypuxay79gjqv6msvd9t2y49w4fz8q7fyenx5aggj0ua
37q3h7kwz
    - key: code_id
      value: "12"
    type: instantiate
  - attributes:
    - key: action
      value: /cosmwasm.wasm.v1.MsgInstantiateContract
    - key: module
      value: wasm
    - key: sender
      value: wasm1wukxp2kldxae36rgjz28umqtq792twtxdfe6ux
    type: message
...

```

In this command, the `12` is the code id - the result of uploading the code. After that, a JSON is an instantiation message - I will talk about this later. Just think about it as a message requiring fields to create a new contract. Every contract has its instantiation message format. For `cw4-group`, there are two fields: `admin` is an address that would be eligible to execute messages on this contract. It is crucial to set it to your address, as we will want to learn how to execute contracts. `members` is an array of addresses that are initial member of the group. We leave it empty for now, but you can put any addresses you want there. Here, I put one hint about messages inline into the command line, but I often put messages to be set to the file and embed them via `$(cat msg.json)`. It is fish syntax, but every shell provides a syntax for this.

Then after the message, you need to add a couple of additional flags. The `--from wallet` is the same as before - the name of the key you created earlier. `--label "Group"` is just an arbitrary name for your contract. An important one is a `--no-admin` flag - keep in mind that it is a different "admin" that we set in the instantiation message. This flag is relevant only for contract migrations, but we won't cover them right now, so leave this flag as it is.

Now, look at the result of the execution. It is very similar to before - much data about the execution process. And again, we need to take a closer look into the `logs` section of the response. This time we are looking at an event with type `instantiate`, and the `_contract_address` attribute - its value is newly created contract address - `wasm1wukxp2kldxae36rgjz28umqtq792twtxdfe6ux` in an example.

Now let's go forward with querying our contract:

```bash
wasmd query wasm contract-state smart \
wasm18yn206ypuxay79gjqv6msvd9t2y49w4fz8q7fyenx5aggj0ua37q3h7kwz \
'{ "list_members": {} }'

data:
  members: []
```

Remember to change the address (right after `smart`) with your contract address. After that, there is another message - this time the query message - which is sent to the contract. This query should return a list of group members. And in fact, it does - response is a single `data` object with a single field - empty members list. That was easy, now let's try the last thing: the execution:

```bash
wasmd tx wasm execute \
wasm18yn206ypuxay79gjqv6msvd9t2y49w4fz8q7fyenx5aggj0ua37q3h7kwz \
'{ "update_members": { "add": [{ "addr": "wasm1wukxp2kldxae36rgjz28umqtq792twtxdfe6ux", "weight": 1 }], "remove": [] } }' \
--from wallet $TXFLAG
```

As you can see, execution is very similar to instantiation is called just once, and execution needs a contract address. It is fair to say that instantiation is a particular case for first execution, which returns the contract address. Just like before we can see that we got some log output - you can analyze it to see that something probably happened. But to ensure that there is an effect on blockchain, the best way would be to query it once again:

```bash
wasmd query wasm contract-state smart \
wasm18yn206ypuxay79gjqv6msvd9t2y49w4fz8q7fyenx5aggj0ua37q3h7kwz \
'{ "list_members": {} }'

data:
  members:
  - addr: wasm1wukxp2kldxae36rgjz28umqtq792twtxdfe6ux
    weight: 1

```

For the time being, this is all you need to know about `wasmd` basics in order to be able to play with your simple contracts. We would focus on testing them locally, but if you want to check in real life, you have some basics now. We will take a closer look at `wasmd` later when we would talk about the architecture of the actor model defining communication between smart contracts.

---

# Smart Contract Basics

> The core ideas behind CosmWasm and the typical contract structure.

## Create a Rust project

As smart contracts are Rust library crates, we will start with creating one:

```bash
cargo new --lib ./empty-contract
```

You created a simple Rust library, but it is not yet ready to be a smart contract. The first thing to do is to update the `Cargo.toml` file:

```toml
[package]
name = "contract"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2021"

[lib]
crate-type = ["cdylib"]

[dependencies]
cosmwasm-std = { version = "1.0.0-beta8", features = ["staking"] }
```

As you can see, I added a `crate-type` field for the library section. Generating the `cdylib` is required to create a proper web assembly binary. The downside of this is that such a library cannot be used as a dependency for other Rust crates - for now, it is not needed, but later we will show how to approach reusing contracts as dependencies.

Additionally, there is one core dependency for smart contracts: the `cosmwasm-std`. This crate is a standard library for smart contracts. It provides essential utilities for communication with the outside world and a couple of helper function and types. Every smart contract we will build will use this dependency.

## Entry points

Typical Rust applications start with the `fn main()` function called by the operating system. Smart contracts are not significantly different. When the message is sent to the contract, a function called "entry point" is called. Unlike native applications, which have only a single `main` entry point, smart contracts have a couple corresponding to different message types: `instantiate`, `execute`, `query`, `sudo`, `migrate` and more.

To start, we will go with three basic entry points:

* `instantiate`: which is called once per smart contract lifetime - you can think about it as a constructor or initializer of a contract.
* `execute`: for handling messages which are able to modify contract state - they are used to perform some actual actions.
* `query`: for handling messages requesting some information from a contract; unlike `execute`, they can never affect any contract state, and are used just like database queries.

Go to your `src/lib.rs` file, and start with an `instantiate` entry point:

```rust
use cosmwasm_std::{
    entry_point, Binary, Deps, DepsMut, Empty, Env, MessageInfo, Response, StdResult,
};

#[entry_point]
pub fn instantiate(
    _deps: DepsMut,
    _env: Env,
    _info: MessageInfo,
    _msg: Empty,
) -> StdResult<Response> {
    Ok(Response::new())
}
```

In fact, `instantiate` is the only entry point required for a smart contract to be valid. It is not very useful in this form, but it is a start. Let's take a closer look at the entry point structure.

First, we start with importing a couple of types just for more consistent usage. Then we define our entry point. Then `instantiate` takes four arguments:

* `deps`: `DepsMut` is a utility type for communicating with the outer world - it allows querying and updating the contract state, querying other contracts state, and gives access to an `API` object with a couple of helper functions for dealing with CW addresses.
* `env`: `Env` is an object representing the blockchains state when executing the message - the chain height and id, current timestamp, and the called contract address.
* `info`: `MessageInfo` contains metainformation about the message which triggered an execution - an address that sens the message, and chain native tokens sent with the message.
* `msg`: `Empty` is the message triggering execution itself - for now, it is `Empty` type that represents `{}` JSON but the type of this argument can be anything that is deserializable, and we will pass more complex types here in the future.

If you are new to the blockchain, those arguments may not have much sense to you, but while progressing wit this guide. We will explain their usage on by one.

Notice an essential attribute decorating our entry point `#[entry_point]`. Its purpose is to wrap the whole entry point to the form Wasm runtime understands. The proper Wasm entry points can use only basic types supported natively by Wasm specification, and Rust structures and enums are not in this set. Working with such entry points would be rather overcomplicated, so CosmWasm creators delivered the `entry_point` macro. It creates the raw Wasm entry point, calling the decorated functions internally and doing all the magic required to build our high-level Rust arguments from arguments passed by Wasm runtime.

The next thing to look at is the return type. We used `StdResult<Response>` for this simple example. Which is an alias for `Result<Response, StdError>`. The return entry point type would always be a `Result` type, with some error type implementing `ToString` trait and a well-defined type for success case. For most entry points, an "Ok" case would be the `Response` type that allows fitting the contract into our actor model, which we will discuss very soon.

The body of the entry point is as simple as it could be - it always succeeds with a trivial empty response.

---

## Building the contract

Now it is time to build our contract. We can use traditional cargo build pipeline for local testing purposes: `cargo build` for compiling it and `cargo test` for running all tests (which we don't have yet, but we will work on that soon).

However, we need to create a wasm binary to upload the contract to blockchain. We can do it by passing an additional argument to the build command:

```bash
cargo build --target wasm32-unknown-unknown --release
```

The `--target` argument tells cargo to perform cross-compilation for a given target instead of building a native binary for an OS it is running on - in this case, `wasm32-unknown-unknown`, which is a fancy name for Wasm target.

Additionally, I passed the `--release` argument to the command - it is not required, but in most cases, debug information is not very useful while running on-chain. It is crucial to reduce the uploaded binary size for gas cost minimization. It is worth knowing that there is a `CosmWasm Rust Optimizer` tool that takes care of building even smaller binaries. For production, all the contracts should be compiled using this tool, but for learning purposes, it is not an essential thing to do.

### Aliasing build command

Now I can see you are disappointed in building your contracts with some overcomplicated command instead of simple `cargo build`. Hopefully, it is not the case. The common practice is to alias the building command to make it as simple as building a native app.

Let's create the `.cargo/config` file in you contract project directory with the following context:

```toml
[alias]
wasm = "build --target wasm32-unknown-unknown --release"
wasm-debug = "build --target wasm32-unknown-unknown"
```

Now, building your Wasm binary is as easy as executing `cargo wasm`. We also added the additional `wasm-debug` command for rare cases when we want to build the wasm binary, including debug information.

### Checking contract validity

When the contract is built, the last step is to ensure it is a valid CosmWasm contract is to call `cosmwasm-check` on it:

```rust
cargo wasm
...
cosmwasm-check ./target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/release/contract.wasm
Available capabilities: {"cosmwasm_1_1", "staking", "stargate", "iterator", "cosmwasm_1_2"}

./target/wasm32-unknown-unknown/release/contract.wasm: pass
```

---
