---
title: 'Abstract Money and the benefits it brings'
excerpt: 'The idea of money as always become more abstract as society expands. In
the past there was metals. Now it is paper and digital debt. Honestly,
we are already in the abstract space. That is a completely different
subject this article is about a company who creates build tooling with CosmWasm. Abstract Money'
coverImage: '/assets/blog/img_bin/abstract_money_article_1.png'
date: '2023-06-18T09:42:25.631Z'
author:
  name: 'Justin Bender'
  picture: '/assets/blog/authors/bender.png'
ogImage:
  url: '/assets/blog/img_bin/abstract_money_article_1.png'
---

# Abstract Money and the benefits it brings

The idea of money as always become more abstract as society expands. In
the past there was metals. Now it is paper and digital debt. Honestly,
we are already in the abstract space. That is a completely different
subject this article is about a company who creates build tooling with CosmWasm. [Abstract Money](https://abstract.money)

## What is Abstract Money?

> Streamline the development of interchain apps.

Abstract's CosmWasm framework lets you build reusable, composable
modules enhancing collaboration and scalability. From concept to launch,
Abstract scales with your ambitions.

* [Start Building](https://docs.abstract.money/)
* [Account Console](https://app.abstract.money/)

Designed for developers

All-in-one smart-contract framework

Abstract provides a wide variety of services for new and existing
CosmWasm projects. Choose from our curated library of modules or develop
your own using Abstract SDK.

* `Abstract SDK`: Build and monetize your CosmWasm smart contracts with
  our custom SDK featuring hands-off state-management, DEX integrations
  and more.
* `Custom Governance`: Customize the governance structure of your
  application to your specifications. Integrate with multi-signature
  wallets, DaoDao, or a custom contract if those don't suit your needs.
* `Testing Infrastructure (cw-orchestrator)`: Integrate with Abstract
  and quickly increase test coverage using our vast integration testing
  library.
* `Multisignature Wallet Management`: Manage members, proposals, and
  votes for CW3-Flex and CW3-Fixed multi-signature wallets.
* `Version Management`: Easily upgrade your installed modules to get new
  features and apply bug-fixes.

### Integrations

Applications already available with Abstract modules:

* [WYND](https://app.wynddao.com/)
* [Osmosis](https://osmosis.zone/)
* [Atropost](https://astroport.fi/)
* [TerraSwap](https://app.terraswap.io/)

> SDK Integrations

* [Cron](https://cron.cat/)
* [White Whale](https://whitewhale.money/)
* [NOIS](https://nois.network/)

### Open-Source Tooling

## Orchestrator: CosmWasm scripting library

Multi-environment CosmWasm smart-contract deployment and scripting.

* Mock networks and contracts
* Strongly typed in Rust
* Fast iteration and debugging

### Networks & Validators

* `Juno`: Abstract is deployed on and runs a high-quality
  multi-party-signature validator for Juno Network. [Stake with Abstract](https://app.abstract.money/juno/delegate)
* `Archway`: Abstract is fully deployed on Torii and Constantine
  Testnets.
* `Terra V2`: Abstract is fully-deployed on Terra Testnet.
* `Injective`: Undergoing testing
* `Neutron`: Abstract is fully deployed on Neutron Testnet.
* `Secret Network`: Coming soon

---

# But what is Abstract Money, did that really explain it well?

We should search a bit deeper. Let's checkout the [Abstract Money
Book](https://docs.abstract.money/)

## The Abstract Development Platform

### SDK Background

> Welcome to Abstract, the interchain CosmWasm development platform. We
are building tools and infrastructure for the next generation of
smart-contract applications.

#### What is the Abstract Platform?

The Abstract platform is a combination of CosmWasm tooling, on-chain
smart-contract infrastructure and front-end libraries. It's designed to
be modular, allowing developers to choose the components they need to
build their application. While Abstract tries to simplify a lot of the
development experience, it is inherently a power-tool, allowing you to
get more done with less.

#### The Abstract SDK

The Abstract SDK is a modular smart contract framework designed to
enhance the development of CosmWasm dApps. It's built on top of
CosmWasm; a battle-tested WASM-based smart-contract framework, written
in Rust.

Here's a small snippet of code to give you an idea of what using the
Abstract SDK looks like:

```rust
#![allow(unused)]
fn main() {
pub const COUNTER_APP: CounterApp = CounterApp::new(COUNTER_ID, APP
_VERSION, None)
    .with_instantiate(handlers::instantiate)
    .with_execute(handlers::execute)
    .with_query(handlers::query)
    .with_sudo(handlers::sudo)
    .with_receive(handlers::receive)
    .with_replies(&[(1u64, handlers::reply)])
    .with_migrate(handlers::migrate);
}
```

This code above defines an Abstract app, which is a smart-contract that can be installed on any Abstract Account. The app has a unique ID and a version, both are used to offer the app on the Abstract App store, allowing other users to install the app on their account.

The customizable handlers allow for full developer freedom and have an App object available within them. This object is highly programmable through the `abstract-sdk`, which is our Account Abstraction Toolbox. In a nutshell it allows you to perform complex multi-contract interactions with very minimal code while not compromising on the contract's programmability in any way.

* [Getting Started](https://docs.abstract.money/./3_get_started/1_index.html)

#### Cw-Orchestrator

`cw-orchestrator` is a smart-contract scripting library that allows you to re-use code for use  in testing and deployments. It is also our primary tool for making Abstract's infrastructure highly available allowing us to make development with Abstract a pleasant experience.

Here's a snippet that sets up the complete Abstract framework on a cw-multi-test environment and deploys the previously shown App contract to the framework.

```rust
#![allow(unused)]
fn main() {
// Create a sender and instantiate the mock environment
let sender = Addr::unchecked("sender");
let mock = Mock::new(&sender);

// Construct the counter interface (a wrapper around the contract's
 entry points)
let contract = CounterApp::new(COUNTER_ID, mock.clone());

// Deploy Abstract to the mock
let abstr_deployment = Abstract::deploy_on(mock, Empty{})?;

// Create a new account to install the app onto
let account =
    abstr_deployment
        .account_factory
        .create_default_account(GovernanceDetails::Monarchy {
            monarch: sender.to_string(),
        })?;

// Claim the namespace so app can be deployed
abstr_deployment
    .version_control
    .claim_namespaces(1, vec!["my-namespace".to_string()])?;

// Deploy the app!
contract.deploy(APP_VERSION.parse()?)?;
}
```

Using cw-orchestrator for your testing and deployment needs to reduce your testing setup and complexity. Improve both the code's readability and maintainability. It's design allows us to share our contracts with any developer that wants to use them with a few lines of code. This greatly reduces the friction of using our code and it allows you to provide the same experience to developers that might want to use your code, giving you and edge over other options.

---

## Abstract.js

Abstract.js is the JavaScript package for interacting with the on-chain Abstract framework.

# The Abstract SDK Design Space

The first step to using a tool is learning its purpose and capabilities. Working with the Abstract SDK is no different. This page will help you understand the design space that Abstract SDK operates in, which will help you reason about how to use the SDK effectively.

## Design Space

The Abstract SDK design space is a superset of the classical smart-contract design space. That any application built with stand-alone smart-contracts can be implemented with the SDK as well. However, Abstract's design space is unique. That it allows for a level of code re-useability that would not be possible with stand-alone smart-contracts. By thinking about on-chain functionality in a functional sense, we created a system where application development can be done in a more conceptual way.

Additionally the SDK allows for software distribution that is unparalleled in the smart-contract space. With the Abstract SDK you can write you code once, deploy it to any blockchain that supports CosmWasm and let other developers **and users** use it within minutes. This opens up the possibility of creating a marketplace for smart-contracts, where developers can sell their code to other developers and users in a permissionless way.

This section will give you a high-level overview of the different approaches and how they can be used to build your application.

### Hosted Applications

Hosted applications are traditionally applications that are built using stand-alone smart-contracts. Examples of these types of applications are dexes, lending markets, yield aggregators, etc. What makes these applications **hosted** is that they are deployed by the maintainers of the application and often require the user to transfer funds to the application's smart-contract in order to use it.


```text
            Developer Team
[Users] --> [Application]
```

#### Self-Hosted Applications

By self-hosted applcations we mean applications that are **fully** owned by the user. This means that the user does not have to transfer funds to the application's smart contract in order to use it. Instead the user can deploy the application's smart-contract to their won account and use it from there. This is a novel concept that is only possible with the Abstract SDK.

```text
                             User's Account
                          -> [App] -> [Account]
                        /
Developers             /     User's Account
  [App]    -> [App Store] -> [App] -> [Account]
                        \
                         \   User's Account
                          -> [App] -> [Account]
```

This has two main benefits:

* `Sovereignty`: There are less trust assumptions that the user has to make. The user does not have to trust the application's maintainers to not steal their funds.
* `Customizability`: The user can customize the application to their liking. Applications that take this design in mind can provide novel customization options that would not be possible with hosted applications.

---

# Abstract SDK - How to get started

This section will walk through the process of setting up your development environment, creating an `app module`, and deploying your first app to our on-chain store with `cw-orchestrator`.

If you want to learn more about Abstract before writing code you can check out the [About Abstract](https://docs.abstract.money/4_framework/1_abstract_sdk.html) section of our documentation.

## Prerequisites

* [Rust](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/)
* [CosmWasm](https://book.cosmwasm.com/)(kind of know)
* [cw-orchestrator](https://orchestrator.abstract.money/)(barely know)

---

## Setting up the environment

Before you get started with the Abstract SDK, you will need to set up your development environment. This guide will walk you through the process of setting up your environment and creating your first Abstract app module.

* Rust: To work with the SDK you will need the Rust programming language installed.
* WASM: Additionally, you will need the Wasm compiler installed to build WASM binaries. `rustup target add wasm32-unknown-unknown`
* Git: Used to clone repositories and save your own progress.

### Recommended tools

* [Rust Analyzer:](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=rust-lang.rust-analyzer) IDE support for Rust
* [Docker:](https://docs.docker.com/desktop/) Containerization for running testing
* [Just:](https://github.com/casey/just#installation) Command runner that we use to improve the development flow.

### Using the Template

Time to start building. We'll get you set up with the Abstract App template which contains:

* A scaffold app module with:
  * A basic contract
  * `cw-orchestrator` interface and deployment script
  * Integration tests
* A scaffold front-end with:
  * A basic UI
  * A basic API client
* A set of just commands that will boost your productivity

Go to [our App Template on Github](https://github.com/AbstractSDK/app-template) and click on the "Use this template" button to create a new repository based on the template. You can name the repository whatever you want, but we recommend using the name of your module.

Go ahead and read through the readme of the template repository. It contains instructions on how tot set up your development environment and how the template is structured.

### Contract Layout

The template contains a scaffold contract that you can use as a starting point for your own contract. The contract is located in the `src` directory and is structured as follows:

* `contract.rs`: This file is the top-level file for your module. It contains the type definition of your module. The cost builder that constructs your contract. It also contains a macro that exports your contract's entry points. You can also specify the contract's dependencies here.
* `error.rs`: This file contains the error types that your contract can return.
* `msg.rs`: Custom message types that your contract can receive. These messages also have `cw-orchestrator` macros attached to them which comes in useful with you are writing your integration tests.
* `state.rs`: State types that your contract will use to store state in the blockchain.
* `interface.rs`: Interface that your contract will use to interact with the `cw-orchestrator` library.
* `replies/`: This directory contains the reply handlers that your contract will use to handle replies.
* `handlers/`: This directory contains the message handlers that your contract will use to handle the different messages it can receive.

#### Front-end layout

We need to learn more about the frontend apparently.

#### Tools to use in the template

The following Rust tools are used extensively in our template to improve your productivity.

* [Taplo:](https://taplo.tamasfe.dev/cli/installation/cargo.html) The CI shipping with the template will perform formatting checks. To ensure you call the checks, you can install Taplo and use the `just format` command to format your code and toml files.
* [Nextest:](https://nexte.st/index.html) A better cargo test runner
* [Cargo Limit:](https://github.com/alopatindev/cargo-limit) Prioritizes errors over warnings in compile output as well as some other small improvements.
* [Cargo Watch:](https://crates.io/crates/cargo-watch) Allows you to automatically re-run compilation when files change. This is useful when you are working on the contracts and want to fix compiler errors one by one.

You can install them by running `just install-tools`. All of the tools are built from source by Cargo.

---

# Module Builder

Abstract provides multiple module bases, as detailed in our section on **modules**. These base implementation provide you the minimal state and configuration required to start building your modular application. After setting up your module base from our template you'll probably want to customize it. Our module builder pattern allows you to do just that. It also give you a great overview on all the entry points in your module, and those that others have built.

### Overview

The builder pattern employed in building an Abstract module is a slight variation of the actual design pattern. Instead, the module builder lets you set custom entry point handlers at compile time, meaning you end up with a `const` value that is heavily optimized by the compiler. This ensures that the overhead of using Abstract has a negatable effect on both runtime and WASM binary size.

## App Type

To compose your module, first alias the app type by inserting you custom messages. These messages are inserted in the top-level entry point message types which we will cover later on. Here's an example:

```rust
pub type CounterApp = AppContract<
    CounterError,
    CounterInitMsg,
    CounterExecMsg,
    CounterQueryMsg,
    CounterMigrateMsg,
    CounterReceiveMsg,
    CounterSudoMsg,
>;
```

All of these messages can be customized and will be used to type-check the rest of the implementation.

### Build the App

Now that you have your type defined you can start using the builder. To do this, first construct the base version of the app:

```rust
pub const COUNTER_APP: CounterApp = CounterApp::new(COUNTER_ID, APP_VERSION, None)
```

The constructor takes three variables:

1. `contract_id`: The contract ID is a string that will be saved to a `cw2` storage item. This ensures that the contract can not be migrated to a different contract with a different function and also acts as an informational tag for off-chain processes.
2. `contract_version`: The contract version should be the version of the crate, it is also stored in the `cw2` item and is checked when performing migrations and on-chain dependency resolution.
3. `metadata`: An optional URL that can be used to retrieve data off-chain. Can be used with the Abstract Metadata Standard to automatically generate interactive front-end components for the module.

All these fields are used in a custom `moduleData` store as well, along with the module's dependencies, which we will come back to later. Here's the definition of the `ModuleData` field:

```rust
pub const MODULE: Item<ModuleData> = Item::new("module_data");

#[derive(Debug, Clone, Serialize, Deserialize, PartialEq, Eq)]
pub struct ModuleData {
    /// The name of the module, which should be composed of
    /// the publisher's namespace and module id. eg. `cw-plus:cw20-base`
    pub module: String,
    /// Semantic version of the module's crate on release.
    /// Is used for migration assertions
    pub version: String,
    /// List of modules that this module depends on
    /// along with its version requirements.
    pub dependencies: Vec<Dependency>,
    /// URL to data that follows the Abstract metadata standard for
    /// resolving off-chain module information.
    pub metadata: Option<String>,
}
```

### Handlers

Then add whatever handler functions you need. These functions will be called whatever the specific endpoint is called on the module. A special feature about the functions is that we also insert the instance of you app into the function's attributes. This enables you to access the module struct in your code. You will learn why this is such a powerful features in our selection on the `Abstract SDK`.

Here's an example of a module with some handlers set:

```rust
pub const COUNTER_APP: CounterApp = CounterApp::new(COUNTER_ID, APP_VERSION, None)
    .with_instantiate(handlers::instantiate)
    .with_execute(handlers::execute)
    .with_query(handlers::query)
    .with_sudo(handlers::sudo)
    .with_receive(handlers::receive)
    .with_replies(&[(1u64, handlers::reply)])
    .with_migrate(handlers::migrate);

```

Let's go through all the available customizable handlers the function signatures they require and how/when they get called.

The **base** fields and variants mentioned in the messages below are defined by the **base module type** that you choose to use. In this example we're working with an `App`.

### Instantiate

The instantiate entry point is a mutable entry point of the contract that can only be called on contract instantiation. Instantiation of a contract is essentially the association of a public address to a contract's state.

#### Function Signature

Expected function signature for the custom instantiate handler:

```rust
/// Function signature for an instantiate handler.
pub type InstantiateHandlerFn<Module, CustomInitMsg, Error> =
    fn(DepsMut, Env, MessageInfo, Module, CustomInitMsg) -> Result<Response, Error>;
```

#### Message

In order to instantiate an Abstract Module, you need to provide an InstantiateMsg with the following structure:

```rust
#[cosmwasm_schema::cw_serde]
pub struct InstantiateMsg<BaseMsg, CustomInitMsg = Empty> {
    /// base instantiate information
    pub base: BaseMsg,
    /// custom instantiate msg
    pub module: CustomInitMsg,
}
```

When the module's instantiate function is called to struct's module field is passed to your custom instantiation handler for you to perform any custom logic.

### Execute

The execute entry is a mutable entry point of the contract. Logic in this function can update the contract's state and trigger state changes in other contracts by calling them. It is where the majority of your contract's logic will reside

#### Function Signature

Expected function signature for the custom execute handler:

```rust
/// Function signature for an execute handler.
pub type ExecuteHandlerFn<Module, CustomExecMsg, Error> =
    fn(DepsMut, Env, MessageInfo, Module, CustomExecMsg) -> Result<Response, Error>;
```

#### Message

Called when the App's `ExecuteMsg::Module` variant is called on the execute entry point.

```rust
/// Wrapper around all possible messages that can be sent to the module.
#[cosmwasm_schema::cw_serde]
pub enum ExecuteMsg<BaseMsg, CustomExecMsg, ReceiveMsg = Empty> {
    /// A configuration message, defined by the base.
    Base(BaseMsg),
    /// An app request defined by a base consumer.
    Module(CustomExecMsg),
    /// IbcReceive to process IBC callbacks
    IbcCallback(IbcResponseMsg),
    /// Receive endpoint for CW20 / external service integrations
    Receive(ReceiveMsg),
}
```

The content of the `Module` variant is passed to your custom execute handler.

### Query

The query entry point is the non-mutable entry point of the contract. Like its name implies it is used to retrieve data from the contract's state. This state retrieval can have a computation component but it can not alter the contract's or any other state.

#### Function Signature

Expected function signature for the custom handler:

```rust
/// Function signature for a query handler.
pub type QueryHandlerFn<Module, CustomQueryMsg, Error> =
    fn(Deps, Env, &Module, CustomQueryMsg) -> Result<Binary, Error>;
```

#### Messages

Called when the Apps' `QueryMsg::Module` variant is called on the query entry point.

```rust
#[cosmwasm_schema::cw_serde]
pub enum QueryMsg<BaseMsg, CustomQueryMsg = Empty> {
    /// A query to the base.
    Base(BaseMsg),
    /// Custom query
    Module(CustomQueryMsg),
}
```

The content of the `Module` variant is passed to your custom query handler.

### Migrate

The migrate entry point is a mutable entry point that is called **after** a code_id change is applied to the contract. A migration in CosmWasm essentially swaps out the code that's executed at the contract's address while keeping the state as-is. The implementation of this function is often used to change the format of the contract's state by loading the data as the original format and overwriting it with a new format. All adapter base implementations already perform version assertions that make it impossible to migrate to a contract with a different ID or with a version that is lesser or equal to the old version.

#### Function Signature

Expected function signature for the custom migrate handler:

```rust
/// Function signature for a migrate handler.
pub type MigrateHandlerFn<Module, CustomMigrateMsg, Error> =
    fn(DepsMut, Env, Module, CustomMigrateMsg) -> Result<Response,Error>;
```

#### Message

Called when the App's migrate entry point is called. Uses the struct's `module` field to customize the migration. Only this field is passed to the handler function.

```rust
#[cosmwasm_schema::cw_serde]
pub struct MigrateMsg<BaseMsg = Empty, CustomMigrateMsg = Empty> {
    /// base migrate information
    pub base: BaseMsg,
    /// custom migrate msg
    pub module: CustomMigrateMsg,
}
```

### Reply

The reply entry point is a mutable entry point that is optionally called **after** a previous mutable action. It is often used by factory contracts to retrieve the contract of a newly instantiated contract. It essentially provides the ability to perform callbacks on actions. A reply can be requested using CosmWasm's `SubMsg` type and requires a unique `ReplyId` which is a `u64`. The customizable handler takes an array of `(ReplyId, ReplyFn)` tuples and matches any incoming reply on the correct `ReplyId` for you.

#### Function Signature

Expected function signature for the custom reply handler:

```rust
/// Function signature for a reply handler.
pub type ReplyHandlerFn<Module, Error> = fn(DepsMut, Env, Module, Reply) -> Result<Response, Error>;
```

#### Message

There is no customizable message associated with this entry point.

### Sudo

The sudo entry point is a mutable entry point that can only be called by the chain's governance module. I.e. any calls made to this contract should have been required to have gone through the chain's governance process. This can vary from chain to chain.

#### Functional Signature

Expected function signature for the custom sudo hander:

```rust
/// Function signature for a sudo handler.
pub type SudoHandlerFn<Module, CustomSudoMsg, Error> =
    fn(DepsMut, Env, Module, CustomSudoMsg) -> Result<Response, Error>;
```

#### Message

There is no base message for this entry point. Your message will be the message that the endpoint accepts.

### Receive

The receive handler is a mutable entry point of the contract. It is similar to the `execute` handler but is specifically geared towards handling messages that expect a `Recieve` variant in the `ExecuteMsg`. Examples of this include but are not limited to:

* `Cw20 send messages`
* `Nois Network random number feed`

#### Function Signature

Expected function signature for the custom receive handler:

```rust
/// Function signature for a receive handler.
pub type ReceiveHandlerFn<Module, ReceiveMsg, Error> =
    fn(DepsMut, Env, MessageInfo, Module, ReceiveMsg) -> Result<Response, Error>;
```

#### Message

Called when the App's `ExecuteMsg::Recieve` variant is called on the execute entry point.

```rust
/// Wrapper around all possible messages that can be sent to the module.
#[cosmwasm_schema::cw_serde]
pub enum ExecuteMsg<BaseMsg, CustomExecMsg, ReceiveMsg = Empty> {
    /// A configuration message, defined by the base.
    Base(BaseMsg),
    /// An app request defined by a base consumer.
    Module(CustomExecMsg),
    /// IbcReceive to process IBC callbacks
    IbcCallback(IbcResponseMsg),
    /// Receive endpoint for CW20 / external service integrations
    Receive(ReceiveMsg),
}
```

### IBC Callback

The ibc callback handler is a mutable entry point of the contract. It is similar to the `execute` handler but is specifically geared towards handling callbacks from IBC actions. Since interacting with IBC is an asynchronous process we aim to provide you with the means to easily work with IBC. Our SDK helps you send IBC messages while this handler helps you execute logic whenever the IBC action succeeds or fails. Our framework does this by optionally allowing you to add callback information to any IBC action. A callback requires a unique `CallbackId` which is a `String`. The callback handler takes an array of `(CallbackId, IbcCallbackFn)` tuples and matches any incoming callback on the correct `CallbackId` for you. Every call to this handler is verified by asserting that the caller is the framework's IBC-Client contract.

> We cover Abstract's IBC logic later in this book

#### Function Signature

```rust
/// Function signature for an IBC callback handler.
pub type IbcCallbackHandlerFn<Module, Error> =
    fn(DepsMut, Env, MessageInfo, Module, CallbackId, StdAck) -> Result<Response, Error>;
```

#### Message

Called when the App's `ExecuteMsg::IbcCallback` variant is called on the execute entry point. The receiving type is not customizable but contains the IBC action acknowledgement.

```rust
/// Wrapper around all possible messages that can be sent to the module.
#[cosmwasm_schema::cw_serde]
pub enum ExecuteMsg<BaseMsg, CustomExecMsg, ReceiveMsg = Empty> {
    /// A configuration message, defined by the base.
    Base(BaseMsg),
    /// An app request defined by a base consumer.
    Module(CustomExecMsg),
    /// IbcReceive to process IBC callbacks
    IbcCallback(IbcResponseMsg),
    /// Receive endpoint for CW20 / external service integrations
    Receive(ReceiveMsg),
}
```

### Dependencies

There is one additional contractor method available on the module builder and that's the `with_dependencies` function. As it states it allows you to specify any smart-contract dependencies that your application might require. This is akey requirement for building truly composable and secure applications. We'll cover dependencies further later on.

---

### Summary

The Abstract SDK allows you to easily construct modules by using our low-overhead smart-contract builder. By employing this pattern you re-use the base contract's code, allowing you to focus on the ideas that make your product unique.

In the next section we'll cover how you can use the module object that we make available in the function handlers to write highly function smart-contract code.

Ever wanted to swap on any cosmos DEX with only one line of code? Look no further.

---

# Abstract Development Platform

## SDK

Now that you've got our module set up you're ready for our hot sauce. While you can create any regular smart-contract in a module, it's where our software shine. Instead we've created an **account abstraction programming toolbox** that allows you to easily control an Abstract Account's interactions, as well as **create your own APIs** that can be used by other developers to interact with your unique application. Composability galore.

### How it works

The `abstract-sdk` crate is a toolbox for developers to create
composable smart-contract APIs. It allows you to use composed
functionality with a few keystrokes through it's combination of
supertraits and blanket implementations. Supertraits are Rust traits
that have one or multiple trait bounds while a blanket implementation is
a Rust implementation that is automatically implemented for every object
that meets the trait bounds. The Abstract SDK makes use of both to
achieve its modular design.

### Features

Features are the lowest-level traits that are contained within the SDK
and they don't have any trait bounds. They generally act as data
accessor traits. I.e. if a struct implements a feature it means that it
has some way to get the information required by that feature.

Here's an example of such a feature:

```rust
#![allow(unused)]
fn main() {
use crate::{ans_resolve::Resolve, AbstractSdkResult};
use abstract_core::objects::ans_host::AnsHost;
use cosmwasm_std::Deps;

/// Accessor to the Abstract Name Service.
pub trait AbstractNameService: Sized {
    /// Get the ANS host address.
    fn ans_host(&self, deps: Deps) -> AbstractSdkResult<AnsHost>;

    /// Construct the name service client.
    fn name_service<'a>(&'a self, deps: Deps<'a>) -> AbstractNameSeviceClient<Self> {
        AbstractNameServiceClient {
            _base: self,
            deps,
            host: self.ans_host(deps).unwrap(),
        }
    }
}
}
```

Any structure that implements this traits has access to the Abstract Name Service, and thus has a way to resolve ANS entries. By composing these features it is possible to write advanced APIs that are automatically implemented on objects that support its required features.

Now instead of letting you implement these traits yourself, we've already gone ahead and implemented them for the App and Adapter structs.
Here's the implementation for the App:

```rust
#![allow(unused)]
fn main() {
impl<
        Error: ContractError,
        CustomInitMsg,
        CustomExecMsg,
        CustomQueryMsg,
        CustomMigrateMsg,
        ReceiveMsg,
        SudoMsg,
    > AbstractNameService
    for AppContract<
        Error,
        CustomInitMsg,
        CustomExecMsg,
        CustomQueryMsg,
        CustomMigrateMsg,
        ReceiveMsg,
        SudoMsg,
    >
{
    fn ans_host(&self, deps: Deps) -> AbstractSdkResult<AnsHost> {
        // Retrieve the ANS host address from the base state.
        Ok(self.base_state.load(deps.storage)?.ans_host)
    }
}
}
```

So when you're building your application the module struct already has the features and data required to do the basic abstract operations. With this we can start creating more advanced functionality.

> Other structs that implement a feature without being module bases are called Feature Objects

### APIs

The Abstract API objects are structs that expose some smart-contract functionality and that can only be retrieved if a contract or feature-object implements the required features/api traits. If the trait constraints of the API is met it is automatically implemented on the object and hence allows you to retrieve the API object.

Most of the APIs either return a `CosmsMsg` or an `AccountAction`. The `CosmsMsg` is a message that should be added as-is to the `Response` to perform some action. The `AccountAction` is a message that can be sent to the Abstract Account to perform some action. `AccountActions` can be executed with the `Executor` API. The returned `CosmosMsg` should be added to the action's `Response`.

#### Example

The `Bank` API allows developer is transfer assets from and to the Account through their moudle object. We now want to use this API to create a `Splitter` API that splits that trasfer of some amount of funds between a set of receivers.

```rust
// Trait to retrieve the Splitter object
// Depends on the ability to transfer funds
pub trait SplitterInterface: TransferInterface {
    fn splitter<'a>(&'a self, deps: Deps<'a>) -> Splitter<Self> {
        Splitter { base: self, deps }
    }
}

// Implement for every object that can transfer funds
impl<T> SplitterInterface for T where T: TransferInterface {}

#[derive(Clone)]
pub struct Splitter<'a, T: SplitterInterface> {
    base: &'a T,
    deps: Deps<'a>,
}

impl<'a, T: SplitterInterface> Splitter<'a, T> {
    /// Split an asset to multiple users
    pub fn split(&self, asset: AnsAsset, receivers: &[Addr]) -> AbstractSdkResult<AccountAction> {
        // split the asset between all receivers
        let receives_each = AnsAsset {
            amount: asset
                .amount
                .multiply_ratio(Uint128::one(), Uint128::from(receivers.len() as u128)),
            ..asset
        };

        // Retrieve the bank API
        let bank = self.base.bank(self.deps);
        receivers
            .iter()
            .map(|receiver| {
                // Construct the transfer message
                bank.transfer(vec![&receives_each], receiver)
            })
            .try_fold(AccountAction::new(), |mut acc, v| match v {
                Ok(action) => {
                    // Merge two AccountAction objects
                    acc.merge(action);
                    Ok(acc)
                }
                Err(e) => Err(e),
            })
    }
}
```

These APIs can then be used by any contract that implements its required traits, in this case the `TransferInterface`

```rust
#![allow(unused)]
fn main() {
        let asset = AnsAsset {
            amount: Uint128::from(100u128),
            name: "usd".into(),
        };

        let receivers = vec![
            Addr::unchecked("receiver1"),
            Addr::unchecked("receiver2"),
            Addr::unchecked("receiver3"),
        ];

        let split_funds = module.splitter(deps.as_ref()).split(asset, &receivers)?;
        assert_eq!(split_funds.messages().len(), 3);

        let msg: CosmosMsg = module.executor(deps.as_ref()).execute(vec![split_funds])?;

        Ok(Response::new().add_message(msg))
}
```

---

### Available API Objects

The following API object are available in the Abstract SDK

* Bank
* Executor
* Apps
* Adapters
* Accountant
* IbcClient
* ModuleRegistry
* Modules
* AccountRegistry

#### Usage

Add `abstract-sdk` to your `Cargo.toml` by running: `cargo new abstract-sdk`

Then import the prelude in your contract. This will ensure that you have access to all the traits which should help your IDE with auto completion. `use abstract_sdk::prelude::*;`

---

# Account Creation

We now you're really excited to start playing with modules, but there is one more thing you need to do first. Abstract cares about your efforts and we believe you should have the ability to monetize your modules in any way that you see fit. To help us provide that feature we created the concept of **module namespaces**. A module namespace is your (or your team's) publishing domain for Abstract modules. Through this design you can monetize your product through a namespace or per-modules basis as explained in more detail in the **monetization** section.

Each namespace must be associated with an Abstract account hence you will need to create one.

## Create an Account

Create an account is straight forward process. Go to the `Abstract Account Portal` and click "Create Account". Come back here once you have your account set up.

Are you having trouble creating an account? You can join the [Abstract Money Discord](https://discord.gg/uch3Tq3aym)

## Claim a Namespace

Now that you have your account you can proceed to claim your namespace. The namespace will be exclusively liked to your Abstract Account and will prefix your module names to form a unique module identifier.

> For example, if you namespace is `myapp` and your module name is `mymoule` then your module identifier will be `myapp:mymodule`.

You can easily claim your namespace by going to your Account on our website and click the "Claim Namespace" button on the account page. You will be asked to pay a small fee to claim your namespace. The fee is used to prevent namespace squatting and to help us maintain the Abstract ecosystem.

With the setup out of the way. Let's get to the fun past: building your module.

---


