---
title: 'Going over my Nix OS setup & extension'
excerpt: 'Recently I have, fallen in love. With the idea of Nix and the operating
system. Seems like a great method for reproducability. The
only way to figure it out. Is to put it to the test.'
coverImage: '/assets/blog/img_bin/skull_comic_nix_defender.jpg'
date: '2023-06-15T22:12:50.032Z'
author:
  name: 'Justin Bender'
  picture: '/assets/blog/authors/bender.png'
ogImage:
  url: '/assets/blog/img_bin/skull_comic_nix_defender.jpg'
---

## Going over my Nix OS setup & extensions 💡

💬 Is Nix on of my favorite Operating Systems ever?

Yes it is. I'm absolutely astonished with how it works. But I want to be
very clear. I didn't build it from scratch. Like users have needed in the
past. For this project I went the easy way, using the installer and
stealing the base configuration.

I'll only bore you with what I added. In hopes you'll make it through.
You could run this inside of a virtual machine. This is not the case. We
are replacing a laptops old OS with a new OS. The computer is completely
functional, but the software is no longer supported by the corporations.

> Obsolescence through lack of support 🤬

This is one of the worse features of using the standard machines. You
will eventually be required to replace the OS. Not always an easy task,
but it's better every year.

* Have old computer you need to replace OS.
* Download Nix OS ISO w/ Plasma Desktop.
* Flash OS on false drive with a program like `balenaEtcher`.
* Start laptop boot from flash drive.
* Open the drive
* Use the installer.
* No partition and erase everything 🛑 This is destructive
* Pick all other setting that you need.
* Install Nix OS
* Restart Nix OS and login

### It's that easy?

It sure is. Just with lots more steps in the process. We now only have
the basic Nix OS setup. This includes Plasma Desktop with a plethora of
features. A few other basic programs and Nano as the only editor.

Nano? Yeah only nano. That's the thing. We need to get into the package
manager to download some new packages. There are over 80,000 different
packages for programs [NixOS Search](https://search.nixos.org/packages)

My selection of tooling is evolving and that's just how it is.

#### Nix Packages

* `clang`: C compiler
* `rustup`: Rust Compiler
* `nodejs_18`: Node Version 18
* `nerdfonts`: All fonts I need + more
* `alacritty`: Terminal emulator
* `starship`: Terminal design
* `discord`: Discord social
* `zoom-us`: Video chatting software
* `lynx`: Text Browser
* `vim`: Text Editor
* `tmux`: Multiplexer
* `wget`: Http downloading
* `xclip`: Clipping in terminal to clipboard
* `unzip`: Unzip files
* `git`: Git
* `pandoc`: Markup converter
* `brave`: Browser
* `firefox`: Browser
* `tor-browser-bundle-bin`: Tor Browser
* `gimp`: Image Editing
* `kdenlive`: Video Editing
* `spotify`: Music
* `evolution`: Calendar/Email/Notes


I didn't figure out all of these packages at once. It started one at a
time. Starting with vim and moving down the list. Every time I ran into
the next problem. cc isn’t there. Well I must need clang. `Rust` isn’t
available. So I must need rustup to download cargo. Just going down the
list as I needed them.

This has basically everything that is needed to get ready to work. It's
not perfect. This is because, I still need the configuration files. They
need to be placed in the correct location. This can also be automated,
but not just yet.

### How do we add to the configuration file?

We have to use out text editor and `sudo` privilege to edit this file in
`/etc/nixos/`

* `sudo vim /etc/nixos/configuration.nix`

This allows us to change any configuration that we please. A few options
are, turning bluetooth on, adding packages, setting up automatic
configurations and more.

Then you'll have to use `sudo nixos-rebuild switch`. The switch at the
end. Move over to the new build. So when we add a package to the
`configuration.nix`. We will automatically have access. Without having
to restart the computer.

### Is Nix OS setup already?

Well practically, without getting into each and every configuration file
`.bashrc`, `starship.toml`, `.vimrc` and anything configuration files I
want to edit.

This part I'm doing by hand for this round. Once I have figured out
every file. I'm going to automate the process. While uploading it onto
another laptop. With the goal of creating my development environment.
From nothing more than Nix OS and a configuration file.

### Lessons for your own process

You might want to start using Nix OS yourself. I personally recommend
it. I love it, the feel and the package management philosophy. Worth the
time I put in to figure it out.

You will just have to work from one step at a time. Set it up, try to
run your programs. Every time it fails. Find the package that you need.
Add it to the config file and switch over after the rebuild. After that,
just try the program again. Working on the next error as it comes up.

You really just need to keep going from one problem to the next. The
best part about it. After you do it once. You should be able to
reproduce the same build. Over and over again. Making the time spent
once. Saving you days, weeks, and maybe even months of time over the
rest of my life.

You can get started with nothing more than Nix OS. It just won't have
much functionality.

---

Try it out if you're interested. It's a wonderful framework!

