---
title: 'Tightly Coupled building pattern to optimize page building with
some tailwind.'
excerpt: 'Some of the ways I like to build have changed over the years.
It depends on the situation. Sometimes it is great to break everything
into little components. That is not how we plan to do it today. Let us
talk about bigger files. While I like them for initial development.'
coverImage: '/assets/blog/img_bin/build_and_rebuild_female_face.png'
date: '2023-06-26T15:31:14.629Z'
author:
  name: 'Justin Bender'
  picture: '/assets/blog/authors/bender.png'
ogImage:
  url: '/assets/blog/img_bin/build_and_rebuild_female_face.png'
---

# Tightly Coupled building pattern to optimize page building with some tailwind.

> 🛑 the function in the article might have bugs. It's partially for a
lesson, but I will try to make it completely functional.

When you learn how to develop software. There tends to be many different building patterns that you can follow. Each have some positives and
negatives. Today we will be talking about one that I enjoy using for
smaller projects. Before we have to break everything into components.

Don't get me wrong. If the component is the correct solutions. Then make
the external component that is used in multiple spots. The plan isn't to
stop you from making reusable components. The idea is to keep the page
tightly coupled until it does not need to be tight anymore.

This might seem counter productive to the whole process. Shouldn't we
break everything apart into their own components? No, why should we.

* Are we working with a big team?
* Are we working on a large project?
* Are be conflicting at all?

If we aren't running into problems. Why break it apart yet? To plan
ahead for possible problems? Why, the code we write is module anyway. We
can move it somewhere else. Export it in one area. While importing
somewhere to be used.

### Why break apart the code early?

I'm not sure why you would. That sounds a bit obnoxious while styling
everything. Do you really want to have to go across 5 different files.
Just to get the page working? I sure don't.

## Let's clarify when you should use components.

One thing we should get straight is that using components is a great
tool. There will be times where it's the right option. Sometimes inside
of a file and other times. In a separate file. You have to use your
discretion for each.

The pattern we are going to take is, everything is going to fit on one
page that is used on that page. Unless the components are going to be
reused elsewhere. But that shouldn't prevent you building the feature.

It's okay to repeat code. Realize it's repeated and build a reusable
component off of the brute force solution.

* Get it to work
* Break it down
* Make reusable components

### Getting stuck in the planning stage

The worst part of getting something started is getting it started. Am I
right? If you sit there and think about it for too long. Nothing happens
and you might get annoyed. You made no progress and the list of tasks.
Just keeps getting longer as you think. Maybe it's time to stop thinking
and just start building. Brute force the solution and break it down
afterwards.

Eventually you will be able to see a few steps ahead. The main goal is
to prevent the deadlock of planning. You will fail a few times. You
might get the wrong answer at first, but figure it out after a nap. Who
knows how life works. It just works.

### What patterns can we use in our projects

I enjoy certain patterns in my projects. I also rely on others, to
maintain project patterns I enjoy. I like the idea of TypeScript. Even
though I love JavaScript more. My worry about TypeScript is the fact
there might be breaking changes one day. This is most likely an
unfounded worry, but a worry nonetheless. The reason I enjoy TypeScript
is something I've gone into detail before. So we won't go crazy with it.
I enjoy the ability to have strict typing. To help with checking your
work flow and double checking your coworkers.

## What other patterns can we set for a project?

One aspect I would like to talk about is using a library like
TailwindCSS. Where you might end up with a long list of classes. How can
you maintain the tsx. So it doesn't become overwhelming. Let's look at
some examples to better understand what I mean.

```javascript
<div className="fixed top-0 flex flex-col sm:flex-row text-center w-full pt-5 justify-center bg-gray-300 border-b-4 border-gray-800 shadow-2xl rounded-b-xl max-h-[40vh] sm:max-h-[45vh]" >
```

The class is just getting longer and longer. It's a bit hard to understand what's going on. Especially with the text wrapping. If you have wrapping enabled.

Let's try writing it a different way.

```javascript
<div
  className="
    fixed
    top-0
    flex flex-col sm:flex-row
    text-center
    w-full
    pt-5
    justify-center
    bg-gray-300
    border-b-4 border-gray-800
    shadow-2xl
    rounded-b-xl
    max-h-[40vh] sm:max-h-[45vh]"
>
```

This makes it a bit easier to read but it's not really want I want to
use honestly. I think there could be a nicer option. How can we build something that uses an object like syntax to keep track of everything?

Let's build a function that takes in an object we will define below:

```javascript
type tailwindObject = {
  default: string[];
  sm?: string[];
  md?: string[];
  lg?: string[];
  xl?: string[];
  "2xl"?: string[];
};
```

We are taking in the normal tailwindcss sizes. `sm`, `md`, `lg`, `xl`, and `2xl`. They all take an array of string. That will be concatenated together to make a long string for the styling.

```javascript
export default function classObject(obj: tailwindObject) {
  return Object.entries(obj)
    .map(([key, value]) => {
      if (key === "default") {
        return value.join(" ");
      } else {
        return value.map(innerVal => `${key}:${innerVal}`).join(' ');
      }
    })
    .join(" ");
}
```

If we use this function. We could start to build up our tailwind classes like below:

```javascript
<div
	className={classObject({
		default: [
			'fixed',
			'top-0',
			'flex flex-col',
			'text-center',
			'w-full',
			'pt-5',
			'justify-center',
			'bg-gray-300',
			'border-b-4 border-gray-800',
			'shadow-2xl',
			'rounded-b-xl',
			'max-h-[40vh]'
		],
		sm: [
			'flex-row',
			'max-h-[45vh]'
		]
	})}
>
```

This allows us to keep the values separated into section of screen. We can distinguish the values into individual arrays. That will be combined with the object value. For example `sm: [ 'flex-row' ]` would become `sm:flex-row`. Allowing for the tailwind class to be constructed into a string.

Let's talk about the benefits of this situation a bit. Why would it be
nice to use and why will it be a bit much for the files that we plan to
be using.

Since we plan to make large components. The tailwind classes around
going to get long at times. Maybe we want to make them become a bit more
structured, right. Just like we mentioned about. Now we make every
single line of tailwindcss in the className. They all become 10-20 lines
of code. Expanding the file to an even larger space.

This is unmanageable with this file size. If we were breaking apart the
components into smaller sections. This might be a valid option to try.
So I won't say it's a no go. I would like to come back to this after we
break apart into the smaller pieces.

It's got a nice design that I may use somewhere else for sure:

```javascript
<div
	className={classObject({
		default: [
			'max-h-[40vh]'
		],
		sm: [
			'max-h-[45vh]'
		],
		md: [
			'max-h-[50vh]'
		],
		lg: [
			'max-h-[55vh]'
		],
		xl: [
			'max-h-[60vh]'
		],
		'2xl': [
			'max-h-[65vh]'
		]
	})}
>
```

Where you could use it to better manage the window size. I quite enjoy
the look. Just not in a page that's getting long.

---

## Is it getting too long and is it time to break up the components?

What do you think? If we are complaining about the file getting too long
if we create a more pleasant way to look at the code. Should we start to
break them apart more?

It's really going to depend on you. It was making the file extremely
long for me. At that point. I might want to move the components into
smaller files.

## Why might we want to break it apart?

Honestly it's good practice to break the project into smaller
components. At some point of the project it's bound to happen. The only
complaint I have with that setup. Is moving around files just to edit
the base styling. 💡 This is probably a problem I have. Might not be
something everyone gets annoyed with.

Let's go to the part where the file length doesn't matter and we want to
build for reusability.

The type that we created earlier used a method where it had set values
in it's object.

```javascript
type TailwindObject = {
  default: string[];
  sm?: string[];
  md?: string[];
  lg?: string[];
  xl?: string[];
  "2xl"?: string[];
};
```

Maybe we want something a bit more configurable. We can start using the
`generics` that are available in typescript.

If you wanted to create something where the value in the object type.
Could be anything. We should make it into something like this:

```javascript
type TailwindObject<V> = {
  default: string[];
  V?: string[];
};
```

I bet you're curious how this would change our code blocks. Not much in
the function itself. We will add `<V>` in a few places. This allows the
object to grow. With an unlimited number of `keys` as long as it's an
array of strings. They will all get added together. Everything except
`default` will be concatenated together.

```javascript
export default function classObject<V>(obj: TailwindObject<V>) {
  return Object.entries(obj)
    .map(([key, value]) => {
      if (key === "default") {
        return value.join(" ");
      } else {
        return value.map(innerVal => `${key}:${innerVal}`).join(' ');
      }
    })
    .join(" ");
}
```

We should look at a full chunk of code. To better understand what we are
looking at here.

```javascript
type TailwindObject<V> = {
  default: string[];
  V?: string[];
};

export default function classObject<V>(obj: TailwindObject<V>) {
  return Object.entries(obj)
    .map(([key, value]) => {
      if (key === "default") {
        return value.join(" ");
      } else {
        return value.map(innerVal => `${key}:${innerVal}`).join(' ');
      }
    })
    .join(" ");
}

const test_object = {
  default: [
    'flex flex-col'
  ],
  sm: [
    'flex-row'
  ],
  md: [
    'mb-5'
  ],
  "2xl": [
    'mb-20'
  ]
};

console.log(ClassObject(test_object));
```

If we were to run this code. What do you think would be the output?

* `flex flex-col sm:flex-row md:mb-5 2xl:mb-5`

Your output for tailwind would be the string above. Exactly what you
wanted, Just packaged into a cleaner design.

---

## Why do we want a cleaner design to build our tailwind classes?

It becomes easier to maintain. Keeping a strict structure. Allow you to
instantly know where to look to understand. This is not something that
will be extremely easy at first. This is a pattern that will become more
natural as you use it.

The whole idea is to create a system. That doesn't require your easy to
read more than they need to. If you have to read the whole tailwind
class to add onto it. That's a lot of work. Just to add one string. With
the structured object method. You can see exactly what you want. It'
works for other object options like `hover:` and `motion-safe:`.

```javascript
const test_object = {
  default: [
    'flex flex-col'
  ],
  sm: [
    'flex-row'
  ],
  md: [
    'mb-5'
  ],
  hover: [
    'bg-indigo-700'
  ],
  "motion-safe": [
    'animate-spin'
  ]
};

console.log(ClassObject(test_object));
```

* `flex flex-col sm:flex-row md:mb-5 hover:bg-indigo-700
  motion-safe:animate-spin`

That is the beauty of extending the type with a generic value. Let's
look at it again, one more time.

```javascript
type TailwindObject<V> = {
  default: string[];
  V?: string[];
};

export default function classObject<V>(obj: TailwindObject<V>) {
  return Object.entries(obj)
    .map(([key, value]) => {
      if (key === "default") {
        return value.join(" ");
      } else {
        return value.map(innerVal => `${key}:${innerVal}`).join(' ');
      }
    })
    .join(" ");
}
```

Let's talk about it. The `TailwindObject` takes in a `<V>` for generic
value. Inside of the type you have a required `default` and a `V?` which
is an optional `key`. This is how it extends out. The strict value
involved is the `string[]`. Which indicates that it will be an array of
strings.

Now let's go into the function  and function parenthesis we have `obj:
TailwindObject<V>`. Which will allow an object with any amount of keys.
You will also notice that the `classObject<V>` also has the generic
value passed into it. This is a requirement. We don't see the generic
values being used at all in the function. The generic power is in the
value that the function is allowed to consume.

For the function is uses the `Object.entries` taking in the `obj` of
type `TailwindObject<V>`. We `map` over the object. Condensing each key
value into a string.

With little bit of JavaScript/TypeScript code. We can build a more
structured function to use for our tailwind classes. Making it easier to
read and work with in the future. What do you think? 😃


### 🧙 Thanks for reading. I hope you have a wonderful day. 💬



