---
title: 'Basics of Tauri 🦀 & Next.js'
excerpt: "I love Rust🦀 and the tooling being built around it. Tauri is
an optimized, secure, and frontend-independent application for
multi-platform deployments. Let's learn more about it."
coverImage: '/assets/blog/img_bin/tauri_1.4_paniced_man.jpg'
date: '2023-06-27T14:04:15.836Z'
author:
  name: 'Justin Bender'
  picture: '/assets/blog/authors/bender.png'
ogImage:
  url: '/assets/blog/img_bin/tauri_1.4_paniced_man.jpg'
---

# Basics of Tauri 🦀 & Next.js

> At this point, we are at version 1.4 of Tauri 🚀
>
> 🛑 I didn't build with this product. I didn't like the cross
compilation ability at this moment. I'm going to focus on more of the
Rust language over the tooling myself. Sometimes it's just about
exploring.

We are going to go through the guide in the Tauri website. I have
most of my recent experience around `React` and `Next`. So it only
seems correct. To build off of that experience. With the benefit of
learning more about Rust frameworks that exist.

We will walk through creating our first Tauri app using Next.js.

> 🛑 You must have [Rust 🦀](https://www.rust-lang.org/) installed

Tauri is a framework to build desktop applications with any frontend
framework and a Rust core. Each app consists of two parts:

1. Rust binary that creates the windows and exposes native
   functionality to those windows.
2. Frontend of choice that produces the use interface inside the
   window

In the following, we will first scaffold the frontend, set up the Rust
project, and lastly show how to communicate between the two.

---

## Where do we start?

### How about with the user interface explanation

We don't have a server running with our setup. In the sense, you can't
utilize server side rendering (SSR). We need to use a feature called
server side generation (SSG) or we can use static exports. What we want
to think about here is the goal of the output.

Don't worry about the Next.js section. This is outside of the scope of
this article. You have to understand Next.js, SSR, SSG, static
generation and how to develop for each style. The patterns you use for
SSR are not that exact same patterns you might use for SSG.

One example of a difference would be the ability for a server call.
Where the call happens will depend how the page is generated. When we
think about a static page. It's just HTML, CSS and JavaScript. You tend
to use a RESTful architecture. Where the page is using an API using HTTP
calls. This would be compared to something like server side rendering.
Where the html would be generated from the server. Which would allow us
to used server side api calls. Maybe even calling the database itself
with any form of protocols. Then proceeding to send the html back fully
hydrated with information.

In our building of Tauri application we want to use a static generation
setup. Which will have the ability to talk to the backend through API
calls.

Adding to your `next.config.js` file in the project root directory. We
want to include:

```javascript
/** @type {import('next').NextConfig} */
const nextConfig = {
  output: 'export',
}
module.exports = nextConfig
```

This will allow the project to export to an `/out` directory instead of
just `.next/`.

Building static react apps is going to change how you have to develop
these applications. This is out of the scope of this article. I
recommend heading over to the Next.js docs [Static
Exports](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/building-your-application/deploying/static-exports).
Searching over in those docs for your answers to make Next work with
static generation.

---

## Let's get some rust🦀 started

At the heart of every Tauri app is a Rust binary that manages:

* windows
* webview
* calls to the operating system

Through a Rust crate called `tauri`. This project is managed by `Cargo`, the official package manager and general-purpose build tool for Rust.

The Tauri CLI uses Cargo under the hood so you rarely need to interact
with it directly. Cargo has many more useful features that are not
exposed through our CLI, such as testing, linting, and formatting, so
please refer to the official docs for more information on
[Cargo](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/).

### Install the Tauri CLI

If you haven't installed Tauri CLI yet you can do so with npm, yarm,
pnpm, or cargo. But in this article we are only going to use the cargo
example. If you have more questions about this section. You are welcome
to read the [Tauri FAQ](https://tauri.app/v1/guides/faq#node-or-cargo)
for more information.

```bash
cargo install tauri-cli
```

#### Scaffolding a minimum Rust project preconfigured for Tauri

Open the terminal and run the following command:

```bash
cargo tauri init
```

It will walk you through a series of questions:

1. What is you app name?

This will be the name of you r final bundle and what the OS will call
your app. You can use any name you want here.

2. What should the window title be?

This will be the title of the default main window. You can use any title
you want here.

3. Where are your web assets (HTML/CSS/JS) located relative to the
   `<current dir>/src-tauri/cauri.conf.json` file that will be created?

This is the path that Tauri will load your frontend assets from when
building for **production**. Use `../out` for this value.

4. What is the URL of your dev server?

This can either be a URL or a file path that Tauri will load during
**development**. Use `http://localhost:3000` for this value.

5. What is your frontend dev command?

This is the command used to start your frontend dev server. Use `npm run
dev` for this value (make sure to adapt this to use the package manager
of your choice).

6. What is your frontend build command?

This is the command to build your frontend files. use `npm run build`
for this value (make sure to adapt this to use the package manager of
your choice).

> 🧙 Extra Info
>
> If you are familiar with Rust🦀, you will notice that `tauri init`
looks and works similar to `cargo init`. You can just use `cargo init`
and add the necessary Tauri dependencies if you prefer a fully manual
setup.

The `tauri init` command generates a folder called `src-tauri`. It's a
convention for Tauri apps to place all core-related files into this
folder. Let's quickly run through the contents of this folder:

* `Cargo.toml`: The configuration file for Rust projects. You can learn
  more about all the features on [Cargo\'s Manifest Format page](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/manifest.html)
* `tauri.conf.json`: Configuration and customization aspects of your
  Tauri application from the name of your app to the list of allowed
  APIs. See [Tauri\'s API
  Configuration](https://tauri.app/v1/api/config) for the full list of
  supported options and in-depth explanations for each.
* `src/main.rs`: Entry point of your Rust program and the place where we
  bootstrap into Tauri. You will find two sections in it:

```rust
 #![cfg_attr(not(debug_assertions), windows_subsystem = "windows")]
fn main() {
tauri::Builder::default()
   .run(tauri::generate_context!())
   .expect("error while running tauri application");
}
```

The line beginning with the `cfg! macro` serves just one purpose: it
disables the command prompt window that would normally pop up on Windows
if you run a bundled app. If you're on Windows, try to comment it out
and see what happens.

The `main` function is the entry point and the first function that gets
invoked when your program runs.

* `Icons`: changes are you want a snazzy icon for your app! To get you
  going quickly, we included a set of default icons. You should switch
  these out before publishing our application. Learn more about the
  various icon formats in Tauri's [icons feature guide](https://tauri.app/v1/guides/features/icons)

Not that we have the scaffold our frontend and initialized the Rust
project you're almost ready to run your app. Your `tauri.conf.json` file
should look something like this:

```rust
{
  "build": {
    "beforeBuildCommand": "npm run build",
    "beforeDevCommand": "npm run dev",
    "devPath": "http://localhost:3000",
    "distDir": "../out"
  }.
```

That's it. Now you can run the following command in your terminal to
start a development build of your app:

```bash
cargo tauri dev
```

🚀 Now you have a working basic Tauri application with Next.js
frontend. Pretty cool, huh?

## Let's learn how to invoke some commands

Tauri lets you enhance your frontend with native capabilities. We call
these `Commands`, essentially Rust functions that you can call from your
frontend JavaScript. This enables you to handle heavy processing or
calls to the OS in much more performant Rust code.

Let's make a simple example:

```rust
#[tauri::command]
fn greet(name: &str) -> String {
  format!("Hello, {}!", name)
}
```

A Command is just like any regular Rust function, with the addition of
the `#[tauri::command]` attribute macro that allows your function to
communicate with the JavaScript context.

We need to tell Tauri about our newly created command so that it can
route calls accordingly. This is done with the combination of the
`.invoke_handler()` function and the `generate_handler![]` macro you can
see below:

```rust
fn main() {
  tauri::Builder::default()
    .invoke_handler(tauri::generate_handler![greet])
    .run(tauri::generate_context!())
    .expect("error while running tauri application");
}
```

Now you're ready to call your Command from the frontend. To call our
newly created command we will use the `@tauri-apps/api` JavaScript
library. It provides access to core functionality such as window
manipulation, the file system, and more through convenient JavaScript
abstractions. You can install it using your favorite package manager:

```bash
npm install @tauri-apps/api
```

One important thing to note is, all of Tauri's JS APIs require
access to browser-only APIs which means you can only be used in `Client
Components`. If you don't need Server Components you can add `use
client` at the very top of the `app/page.tsx` file, in the guide
however, we will create a separate component so that we don't have
to convert the whole app.

`app/greet.tsx`:

```typescript
'use client'
import { useEffect } from 'react'
import { invoke } from '@tauri-apps/api/tauri'
export default function Greet() {
  useEffect(() => {
    invoke<string>('greet', { name: 'Next.js' })
      .then(console.log)
      .catch(console.error)
  }, [])
  // Necessary because we will have to use Greet as a component later.
  return <></>
}
```
 Now we will use this component in the default `Home` component in `app/page.tsx`. Note that it must be in the actual component tree and can't be a simple function call as long as the parent (in this case the `Home` component) is a Server Component.

`app/page.tsx`:

```typescript
// ..
import Greet from './greet'
export default function Home() {
  return (
    <main className="flex min-h-screen flex-col items-center justify-between p-24">
     <Greet />
     ...
    </main>
  )
}
```

> ### Tip 💡
>
> If you want to know more about the communication between Rust and
JavaScript, please read the Tauri [Inter-Process Communication guide](https://tauri.app/v1/references/architecture/inter-process-communication/)

---

### Start your Dev server

Now that you have everything set up, you should start your application
development server provided by your UI framework or bundler (assuming
you're using one, of course).

Every framework has its own development tooling. It is outside of the
scope of this document to cover all of them or stay up to date.

```bash
cargo tauri dev
```

The first time you run this command, the Rust package manager take
several minutes to download and build all the required packages. Since
they are cached, subsequent builds are much faster, as only your code
needs rebuilding.

Once Rust has finished building, the webview opens, displaying your web
app. You can make changes to your web app, and if your tooling enables
it, the webview should update automatically, just like a browser. When
you make changes to your Rust files, they are rebuilt automatically, and
your app automatically restarts. About Cargo.toml and Source Control

> 💡 In your project repository, you **should** commit the
> `src-tauri/Cargo.lock` along with the `src/-tauri/Cargo.toml` to git
> because Cargo uses the lockfile to provide deterministic builds. As a
> result, it is recommended that all applications check in their
> Cargo.lock. You **should not** commit the `src-tauri/target` folder or
> any of its contents.

🛑 It looks like there are build problems for cross compiling. This is a
killer for me. I hope the project the best. Goodluck with everything.
I'm going to have to focus on something else until I find a better use
for this language.
